BY TERRY MADYAUTA CHAPUNGU . . . . . . . (0) 1
DYNAMOS . . . . . . . . (1) 2 HARARE giants Dynamos finally remembered how to win after they edged Chapungu in a humdinger of a match served at Ascot Stadium yesterday, to end a drawing streak of eight games.
Jarrison Selemani and Evans Katema were on target for Dynamos, while Denver Mukamba scored for Chapungu. The victory was a relief to the Glamour Boys, who were winless in eight matches which ruled them out of contention for the title. For Chapungu, the defeat was their second on the bounce, having lost to Yadah a fortnight ago. Dynamos moved to 43 points, while Chapungu remained fixated on 38 points, although this haul should be enough for the airmen to survive relegation. The two sides began the match on a high tempo, carving out a number of chances in the first 30 minutes, with Mukamba in particular menacing his former paymasters. Veteran forward Phillip Marufu had the first chance in the 13th minute, but hit the side netting with a sizzling effort from just outside the box. Five minutes later, exciting young Dynamos forward Nigel Katawa forced an acrobatic save from Chapungu goalkeeper Herbert Rusawo. However, it was Selemani who broke the deadlock in the 40th minute with a clever shot which caught Rusawo off his line. Mukamba restored parity at the resumption of the second stanza, with a powerful low shot about 20 yards from the box, a goal that was accompanied by wild celebrations from the former Dynamos star. But DeMbare launched a series of attacks and were rewarded when Katema doubled his side’s scores in the 62nd minute. The dreadlocked forward outpaced Moenda Muchingami before releasing a powerful strike just outside the box to leave Rusawo rooted. Dynamos assistant coach Gift Muzadzi, who was in charge of the team as head coach Tonderai Ndiraya is on national duty, praised his charges. “I want to give praise to the boys for this win. After so many draws, I think this will go a long way in boosting our confidence levels,” he said. “We really needed to win and I am glad it came right on time because we were already losing confidence because of these draws.” Chapungu coach Weddington Chinyan’anya was upset with the defeat. “It pains and I am really disappointed with the result. The players were too casual throughout the match and I honestly feel that we let three points slip away,” he said.
“From the onset, we were chasing the game. It’s disappointing.” Teams
Chapungu: H Rusawo, P Gumbo, H Mugoniwa, M Moenda, B Mbavarira, E Muzanenhamo, G Mleya (B Mugoni, 73’), I Nyoni (E Chirape, 54’), M Mavuto, P Marufu, D Mukamba (P Kumbula, 77’).
Dynamos: M Diya, E Jalai, W Sunday, N Mangala (T Macheke, 78’), M Mawadza, N Katawa, T Chisi, G Mukambi, A Maliselo, S Jarrison, E Katema.