BY FORTUNE MBELE TRIANGLE shift focus to defending the Chibuku Super Cup with a clash against Harare City in a quarter-final match at Rufaro Stadium tomorrow. The Sugar Sugar Boys bowed out of the Caf Confederation Cup on Sunday despite winning the second leg of the play-offs against FC Nouadhibou at Barbourfields. They lost 4-3 on goal aggregate after a 2-0 first leg defeat at the Stade Municipal Nouadhibou in Mauritania last week. They are the holders of the Chibuku Super Cup which earned them the ticket to their maiden appearance in the Caf Confederation Cup, lifting the silverware with a 2-0 win over Harare City in November last year. Coach Taurai Mangwiro said they shifted their focus to try and earn another ticket back into the African safari. “We have to shift focus as you can see that once we had opportunities in the Confederation Cup; that is where we were putting a lot of our energy. We bowed out losing only one out of the six games that we played, but not good enough to progress. Now we have to recharge our batteries because we have fallen way backwards in the local league. We were playing in the Confederation Cup by virtue of having won the Chibuku Super Cup, so going into Wednesday’s fixture obviously the whole idea is for us to go out there and defend our trophy to get a second bite of the cherry,” Mangwiro said. The Lowveld-based side hammered Herentals 3-0 in the first round and if they beat Harare City tomorrow, they face Ngezi Platinum Stars in the semi-final at the weekend at a venue to be announced. The last time Triangle played Harare City, they beat them 3-1 in the Castle Lager Premier Soccer League early last month, but their run in the league has been bad, claiming just three points from their last five matches. Triangle lost their last two games to lowly-ranked Mushowani Stars, Yadah and Bulawayo Chiefs as they paid more attention on the finance and energy-sapping African safari where they missed out on the lucrative money-spinning mini league stage. They have two outstanding league matches against Hwange (home) and Chicken Inn (away), shelved as they prepared for the Confederation Cup play-offs second leg against FC Nouadhibou.