BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA Harare CITY………0
Triangle……………0
Harare City win 3-1 on penalties HARARE City goalkeeper Maxwell Nyamupanedengu proved his versatility at Rufaro Stadium yesterday after converting the first penalty in the Chibuku Super Cup quarter-final clash against Triangle before denying Collins Dhuwa with a classy save to help his side set up a semi-final clash with Ngezi Platinum. The match had ended in a 0-0 stalemate which meant the winner had to be decided on penalties. And it was Nyamupanedengu who made the difference, showing conviction and panache as he stepped up to take the club’s first penalty before beating Ronald Mudimu in goals for Triangle with a delightful strike. The Sugar Sugar Boys had scored through Ralph Kawondera, but it turned out to be the only spot kick they managed to convert as Mudimu, Russel Madamombe and Dhuwa all failed to convert their spot kicks. After Moses Muchenje had converted his kick, Raymond Uchena missed, but Marshall Machazane made up for it to kill off the contest with the winning penalty. It was perhaps sweet revenge for Harare City who were beaten by Triangle in last year’s final at Gibbo. Harare City coach Lloyd Chitembwe was delighted to go through. “It’s a good result for us. We have always wanted to continue winning. I am happy with the result; not really the performance. I am happy these boys have mastered the art of winning games. I am very proud to go through to the semi-finals and fight another day,” Chitembwe said. While Triangle coach Taurai Mangwiro congratulated Harare City for advancing to the last four of the tournament, he expressed disappointment with the arrangement of fixtures. “You have to give credit to the boys. They gave a good account for themselves, but the fixtures have not been kind to us. We are representing the country in the Caf Confederation Cup, but you ask yourself are we being punished for representing the country?  We are coming from the Confederation Cup and we travel to Harare for this midweek fixture and now we travel to Bulawayo for a league match against Chicken Inn on Saturday. But for the boys to put up a good show like this, shows we have a good team. Overally, I thought we were the better team, we didn’t have any threat from Harare City but when it comes to penalties there is nothing you can do. Congratulations to Harare City,” he said.