BY FREEMAN MAKOPA MULTI-AWARD-winning gospel musician Janet Manyowa (pictured)’s husband-cum-manager Munyaradzi yesterday said they were delighted by the musician’s seven nominations ahead of this year’s edition of Prophets Emmanuel and Ruth Makandiwa Invitations Concert Awards Night (Permican) set for November 22 at the Harare City Sports Centre. The Nyasha Nengoni hit-maker was nominated for Song of the Year (Nyasha NeNgoni), Album of the Year (Grateful), Video of the Year (Nyasha Nengoni), Best Female Artiste (Grateful), Best Song Writer (Grateful) Best Collaboration (You Are More, featuring Nqubeko Mbata) and Best Live DVD Recording (Grateful). Her husband  told NewsDay Life & Style that the management was grateful of the recognition of their music and that this would encourage them to continue working hard. “We are excited and grateful for the recognition. It encourages us to keep working harder. It’s a positive impact on her (Janet’s) career. All recognition indeed brings about positivity. Janet is a hardworking musician and such recognition helps her to keep producing good music because it is clear that people are proud of her efforts in the industry,” he said. Manyowa said the songstress has won four Permican awards before — Best Newcomer in 2015, Best Album, Best Female Artiste and Video of the Year in 2016 — and hopes to win again this year. “This clearly shows that we are improving on our standards every year and it’s our objective to continue improving,” he said. “We have a strong team which we are proud of and we have the same vison that is to aim for greater things.” Meanwhile, fast-rising gospel musician Mambo Dhuterere has also sung his way onto the list after being nominated for Song of the Year  (Mweya Ndisesekedze), Best Newcomer, Best Traditional, Best Song Writer and Best Collaboration (Ndotenda Ishe Wangu featuring Trymore Bande. Michael Mahendere also features prominently on the list. Two legends, whose names will be disclosed on the awards night, will be honoured this year as well as Most Viewed Song of the Year award after an assessment by the judges.