guest column Ashley Thaba A RECENT conversation with a new friend inspired me to write this week’s article. She was telling me that she is ready to leave drinking, smoking and fornication and turn to Jesus, but she fears she will be bored. Her words made me laugh when she said: “Yep, I am a real sinner, but I want to change!” I laughed because I assured her we are all sinners. Her questions were practical and genuine.
What would weekends look like if she leaves her current life? What would she do on Friday nights if she  decides to follow God’s plan for her life? What will she do to make herself
happy? What does dating look like without pre-marital sex? Honestly, I applaud her candid questions. I think many share her fears, so I thought I should extend my answer to you. First of all, it should be asked why one would want to leave the life of “sin”? Could it be that it isn’t as exciting and fulfilling as the world promises? Is it possible that the late-
night drinking grows “boring” after a while, too? Sleeping with person-after-person gets “boring” as well. Losing money to booze, doing things you later regret and exposing yourself to
possible situations that would put your body into unnecessary harm, isn’t all that it is cracked up to be. Could it be that you actually see that on Saturday morning, after a late
Friday night when your pockets are empty, your head is aching and your kids are disappointed in your lifestyle choices, and you wish there was another path? Do you somehow feel bound to repeat the same mistakes week-after-week, as if you have been enslaved? Or, perhaps, excessive drinking isn’t your thing. Perhaps weekends are full with physical intimacy with people outside marriage? Again, my friend was sharing, saying it isn’t that
she wants to do these things, but then what other choices existed? It feels good and after a long weekend, shouldn’t we do what seems right and pleasurable? Is there another option
for fulfilling fun? Or is the other option, abstinence, boring? Is that, honestly, even a realistic option? Do people still actually save themselves from marriage or does that only
happen in monasteries? Here is a peek into what I told her. I hope it encourages you if you find yourself asking some of the very same questions. I told her to “stick with me for a week and you will see if my life is anything, but boring!”
There is never a dull moment in my life. For those of you who would like a little peek into my life, go to my Facebook page, Mom to Mom: Parenting Consultations or watch my YouTube
channel: Ashley Thaba. You could skip me and read about the lives of the disciples in the Bible. Boredom is not a word you would associate with their stories. Let me tell you a secret as to why my life is not the typical treadmill of life most step on and keep plodding away from until they retire or die. Every single day, multiple times
throughout the day, I ask God to use me as a vessel He can to encourage others. May I be His ambassador to share His light and His love? Could I be His hands to serve others? Could I be
His mouth to speak wisdom to those seeking guidance? Thinking like that may convey that I am trying to sound holy. On the contrary, I have found truth in the verse in the Bible, which states something rather confusing and radical. This is what it says: “Whoever loses his life for my sake will save it, but whoever insists on keeping his life will lose it; and what profit is there in gaining the whole world when it means forfeiting one’s self?” Lose your life and actually save it?
Seems like an oxymoron. Think about it. When your life has purpose and each day you live to bless others and not just yourself, there is something incredibly fulfilling you will inevitably experience. Your
life matters. Someone’s day is a little brighter because you sent them an encouraging text. The person in the grocery store checkout line that looked like they were having a bad day smiled because of some nice comment you said. is an apt depiction of the traffic mad Your friend feels a little less lonely because you showed genuine interest and enquired about her day. Try it. And when you start to look at other people’s problems, suddenly even if
just for a few minutes, you forget about your own. The Bible says in 2 Corinthians 5:20-21: “So we are Christ’s ambassadors; God is making his appeal through us. We speak for Christ when we plead, ‘Come back to God!’ For God made
Christ, who never sinned, to be the offering for our sin, so that we could be made right with God through Christ.” It is exciting to be a spokesperson, who can help people reconcile with their Creator and Saviour. Reporting for duty each morning to the King of Kings and saying: “Alright my Lord, here I am… send me. Let me be your ambassador of reconciliation.” I love the privilege of sharing the good news that God loved you when you were a “sinner” and still wants a
relationship with you. Your earthly father may have let you down, but I can guarantee your Heavenly Father won’t. Through His Holy Spirit, you can experience peace that transcends
understanding and joy that is ever present. It is exhilarating to speak God’s truths and promises and know He will do that which He has promised. I am simply a messenger delivering His wonderful love story to others through sharing of what I and many others have personally experienced. Simply put… it is fun to be a Kingdom
ambassador. I could keep going on how exciting it is to serve the Master of the Universe daily. I also would want to leave you with a few useful tips I gave her for “wholesome” fun weekend activities and dating advice. However, we are out of space, so come back next week and I will share some practical things I do to spice up my life to keep it from becoming boring
without compromising my moral compass.