BY FORTUNE MBELE HIGHLANDERS right-back Bukhosi Ncube is waiting to hear from his orthopedic doctor if he has to be operated on his right knee after undergoing a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan last week. Team doctor Shepherd Khumalo said the MRI scan conducted last week picked up an injury to the meniscus and they expect the orthopedic doctor next week to make a decision on whether the former Under-20 Young Warriors player should undergo arthroscopy or can continue training in the circumstances. The meniscus is a piece of cartilage that provides a cushion between the thighbone and shinbone and according to medical definition, an
arthroscopy is a surgical technique in which a tube-like instrument is inserted into a joint to inspect, diagnose, and repair tissues. “He (Ncube) had an MRI scan done last week. A meniscus injury which he sustained in our away game against Harare City last year was picked
by the scan. His doctor is, however, away in Harare and he will be back in the first week of July. That is when a decision will made if he
has to do an arthroscopy or he can continue like that, Khumalo said.
The knee injury has been career-threatening for Ncube after he fell awkwardly at training in April last year, and it has kept him on the
sidelines. He aggravated the injury in the 2-1 win over Harare City in a league match in June last year, a game that he played the entire 90 minutes. In April this year, he only lasted 17 minutes in the 1-0 defeat to Triangle at Barbourfields (BF) Stadium and had to be stretchered off
the field of play. He was replaced by Under-20 Young Warriors’ skipper, Andrew Mbeba. Another Highlanders’ right-back McClive Phiri also had a horrific humerus (upper arm-bone) injury last month in the goalless draw against
Herentals at BF and was ruled out for six weeks. He underwent a successful surgery after the injury and Khumalo has said the defender is on the mend.
“McClive is due for review in two weeks and is recovering well. He is training on his own, but he is not using the upper body,” Khumalo
said. Mbeba has been holding fort on the rightback. Following the two weeks Africa Cup of Nations’ break, Highlanders started training this week on Tuesday at White Stadium in preparation
for the next league match against Ngezi Platinum Stars at Baobab Stadium next weekend after beating Dynamos in their last game before the
break. Coach Madinda Ndlovu, rumoured to be on his way to Gaborone United in Botswana, has been in charge of training.