BY KENNETH NYANGANI TRIANGLE………..0
CHICKEN INN……..0 Triangle’s two-match winning streak came to an end after they were held by title contenders Chicken Inn at Gibbo Stadium yesterday, but the home side’s coach Taurai Mangwiro was content with his team’s defensive display. After beating Mushowani and Hwange in the last two matches, Chicken Inn was always going to be a huge test for Triangle and for them to come out with a point could be considered a positive result. They could have collected maximum points late on, but were denied what looked like a penalty when Ralph Kawondera was hacked inside the penalty box in referee’s optional time But they did not get the decision. Instead, Kawondera, who was already sitting on a yellow, was shown the second and a red for simulation by referee Tinashe Marange. That did not go very well with Mangwiro, who branded the match officials pathetic. “I am glad that for the second game in this campaign we come with a clean sheet. It was proving difficult to come up with a clean sheet and it is a plus on our side,” Mangwiro said. Chicken Inn coach Joey Antipas was happy to collect a point away from home. “It was an exciting game for both sides. I think both sides gave their all although creating few chances. I believe we dominated the match, but we lacked a killer (finish). However, collecting a point at Gibbo is good,” he said. While Antipas was content with the point, the result saw his side surrendering the top position to champions FC Platinum, who comfortably won their match on Saturday. Meanwhile, Manica Diamonds played their first match at their new home ground Vengere Stadium, as they hosted Ngezi Platinum Stars, but that could not inspire them to a victory as the match ended goalless. Manica Diamonds had been playing their home matches away at Gibbo, but moved to Rusape this week after it was approved by the Premier Soccer League. The Luke Masomere-coached side kept their seventh place on the log with 17 points, while Ngezi Platinum Stars are a rung down. The two sides are separated by a goal difference.