MOTIVATION Steve Nyambe LIFE is easy when you are at the top of the mountain. But things change when you are down in the valley. In such torrid times, that’s when you have to brace up, soldier on and fight like a warrior. The late Steve Jobs, chief executive and co-founder of Apple lnc, once said that: “You can’t connect the dots looking forward, you can only connect them looking backwards. So you have to trust that the dots will somehow connect in your future.” That’s it. Life is a revolving game. Sometimes, it comes like a slow-moving wagon, with some things appearing as very far, yet so near. Life is always clustered with different outcomes. One day the sky is dark, on the following day brightness appears. Some people take life as a disappointing catastrophe. That’s OK. Others see it as an exciting adventure. These are the adventurous ones, the game changers and playmakers. The latter is just, but a proverb of the wise. Because such a view is far ahead of fantasy, it is tilted towards the success arena. It gives no ear to setbacks and disappointments. It inspires you to gallop towards victory. So stand firm and sing from that bright corner. Some days you may be made to have your heartbeat go faster and your emotions explode greatly inside your body, still don’t drop your head. Just keep it above the waters. Score your beauty With such changes, remember you were made to score your beauty. Fight long and hard, that’s the brutal truth towards overcoming power. This is your game to win, losing is your own
choice. Though things seem to be down, they are only down for a moment. Very soon you will still shine like a beacon. In these difficult moments, when everything seems not to work, it tends to be a bit of an uphill task if you rest on the laurels of your potential.
The real you is not imagined. Our best version is still not yet out. You have been cocooned in your old self. Don’t stay there. Move forward, even in the presence of strong opposition. You can oppose your opposition. In the Holy Bible, Samaria once experienced a very difficult time. Things weren’t working. It was disaster after disaster. The state of affairs in their economy had deteriorated beyond
possible redemption. But never forget that, abundance is not something you acquire. It’s something you tune into, (Dr Wayne Dyer). So tune into it now. It’s not impossible. It’s just inches away. Famine in Samaria And there was a great famine in Samaria and behold they besieged it, until an ass’s head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver and the forth part of a cab of doves dung for five
pieces of silver. (2 Kings 6:25) Such was the state of the Samarian situation. It was a hopeless one. Everything appeared to have reached the end. But remember, there is nothing like a hopeless situation. Things aren’t bad as they appear. A situation may appear intimidating, but that’s not the real picture.
That’s not a true summary of life. There’s something great that’s behind. Don’t be held down by those prevailing facts. Not all facts are worth considering. Some things don’t deserve
your valued attention.