ASPIRING beauty models who failed to make it to last week’s audition for the 2019 edition of the Miss World Zimbabwe pageant will now get a chance to try their luck this Saturday after the Miss Zimbabwe Trust (MZT) extended a lifeline to them. BY WINSTONE ANTONIO The initial round of auditions was held from June 13 to 15 at Miss Zimbabwe Trust offices in Harare, with models from Harare, Victoria Falls, Gwanda and Bulawayo dominating the list. The new queen will take over the crown from the reigning Miss World Zimbabwe, Belinda Potts. MTZ administrator Christine Matambo told NewsDay Life & Style yesterday that 35 models had so far been shortlisted from the auditions. “We have decided to extend the Miss World Zimbabwe auditions after we received overwhelming calls from many other aspiring models who had failed to attend the auditions last week due to several perceptible reasons. We, therefore, saw it fit to accommodate those girls from other provinces,” she said. Matambo said they were searching for girls aged between 18 and 25 years who are 1,70 meters tall and not over 60kgs. The contestants should be single and never married or given birth and should have no tattoo or any visible marks and no criminal record. “We want the best from the girls, hence we are taking our time in scouting and auditioning. Casting will be held from 10am to 4pm at the home of Miss Zimbabwe Trust, 14 Boundary Road, Highlands, Harare. The aspiring models should bring their portfolios and heels,” she said. “Tickets for the pageant are already on sale at our offices. They are going for $300 per head, with a table of 10 selling at $3 000. Those who want to pay through RTGS are welcome, as the transaction will be done according to the prevailing interbank rate on the day of payment.” The country’s flagship beauty contest, which is now in the hands of a nine-member executive committee after former MZT chairperson, Marry Chiwenga, stepped down from the position last year, will be held on July 27 under the theme Helping Zimbabwe Survive Natural Disasters.