BY SIMBARASHE SITHOLE SUNGURA kingpin Alick Macheso (pictured) has pledged to build a classroom block at his former school, Enterprise Primary in Shamva. Macheso, who turns 51 years on Monday, said he had decided to celebrate his birthday in a special way by ploughing back to the community through building an ECD block in his rural home. Speaking at the ground-breaking ceremony of the project, Macheso said construction will be facilitated by Enhanced Mortgaging and House (EMH). “I have decided to celebrate my birthday here at my former school by pledging to build an ECD block which will be facilitated by EMH and I am here for the ground-breaking ceremony,”
Macheso said. He also pledged to pay fees for 109 students starting this year, saying he did not complete his academics due to circumstances beyond his control, adding that his desire was to see schoolchildren prospering in education. “I am also going to pay fees for 109 children here. It is unfortunate that I did not complete my education due to some issues, but my desire is to see these children prosper in education because they are the future leaders,” he said. Macheso, who is the humanitarian ambassador at Red Cross Zimbabwe, promised to introduce a first aid course at the school. The school head, Godfrey Chifanzwa, expressed gratitude towards Macheso’s gesture and said the classroom block would be named after the musician. “As a school, we are very grateful to have the veteran musician remembering where he came from. This is, indeed, a memorable day for us and to him, as well as he celebrates his birthday with us. We are going to name the ECD block Alick Macheso, but we implore you not to end there. Keep supporting our various projects. We have a fish pond that needs refurbishment, an irrigation scheme where we need solar panels and also our tuckshop which helps both the school and the community.” Karungu Kwirapo (53), a former classmate and friend to Macheso, lightened up the moment when he recalled how the two were naughty pupils who often smoked while still in primary school. He also said Macheso had always been musical, often absconding lessons to play makeshift guitars. “We were so close during our school days and very notorious. In 1984, we were the pioneers of this school but unfortunately we were smokers and at one point our late headmaster thoroughly disciplined us to an extent that we thought of leaving school,” Kwirapo said. Meanwhile, Macheso has lined up shows this weekend dubbed Macheso’s Birthday Bash, which started last night at Gulez Club in Kwekwe. Tonight he will perform in Shamva before wrapping up his weekend schedule with a family show at Jongwe Corner in Hatfield, Harare tomorrow.