BY FIDELITY MHLANGA THE Zimbabwe Agricultural Society (ZAS) says it is yet to reach financial closure for the construction of its proposed $10 million shopping mall. ZAS chief executive, Anxious Masuka, told NewsDay that work on the mall will be done after the agricultural show set for this August. “We are just doing financial closure now before we start the construction process. Once we have the sponsor on board then we will be able to indicate the timelines (as to when we will finish the project). We are hoping that possibly after the agriculture show something will happen,” Masuka told NewsDay on the sidelines of a preparatory meeting for the launch of this year’s agriculture show. The show to be held from August 26-29 was transformed from the Harare Agriculture Show to Zimbabwe Agricultural Show so as to carry a national appeal. Masuka said ZAS has built an additional 2 000m² hall which is anticipated to be complete by the time the show starts. This will make the entire exhibition space 100 000m². “Space uptake has been incredible, we are marginally above last year. We are at 80 000m² to at least 95 000m² uptake from last year,”he said. The show will host several conferences including the buy local meeting, power and energy indaba, mining and agriculture interface. “There is conflict between farmers and miners, so we have created this interface to make sure that these issues are discussed to find solutions,” Masuka said. This year’s show will be held under the theme Technology, Innovation, Modernisation: Adopt, Accentuate, Accelerate. Masuka said this year’s show is expected to be the biggest national physical interactive space for them to showcase their products and services
“For regional and international organisations and other countries, ZAS will be both an opportunity for trades and a space to network and explore business opportunities,” he said. “The show shall further expand the farmers’ festival initiated in 2018,to give it a national character so that it becomes a platform where discerning corporates can reach and engage their clients and customers and provide an opportunity for brand activation.”