FORMER Miss Zimbabwe and RnB songstress Vanessa “Queen Vee” Sibanda (pictured) has been nominated for the Most Fashionable Female Artiste and Best Female Artiste awards at the prestigious African Social Entertainment Awards (ASEA) set for Johannesburg in South Africa on June 30. BY PRECIOUS CHIDA Queen Vee will tussle it out with South African rapper Nadia Nakai, actress Bonang and presenter and musician, Boity. Speaking to NewsDay Life & Style on Friday, the beauty queen-cum-musician said she was both excited and humbled by the recognition. “I feel extremely blessed. It’s an amazing feeling and it’s humbling and encouraging to me as an artiste. It does not only mean that my music and personality have an impact on the industry, but it also means that Zimbabwe is rising and I, as a true Zimbabwean, will always be proud to raise my flag high,” she said. “My fans’ love and support has kept me humble and I love every one of them. I would not be here if it were not for them.” Sibanda said she was optimistic she would bring the awards home despite the strong competition. “The nomination list is very strong and everyone stands a chance. That is why they are all up there, but at the end of the day, there will be only one winner. But I am very confident about it,” she said. The stylish former Miss Zimbabwe said her wardrobe was inspired by global entertain icons Beyoncé Knowles and Rihanna. “I’m inspired by all kinds of fashion creation. I love fashion and I appreciate it deeply. I look up to many, but driven by the fashion creation of Beyoncé and Rihanna. I, however, have also put my own twist to the mix. Right now it’s winter and anything elegant and warm, from long high knee boots to accessories,” she said. Queen Vee encouraged women to uphold their cultural values and work diligently on their projects. “The universe has a lot to offer, so female musicians out there should take their time, work very hard on becoming successful; never forget their values and cultures and remember to put God first,” she said.