BY VANESSA GONYE NEWSDAY Editor Wisdom Mdzungairi was on Thursday night honoured as the overall winner in the Outstanding Leader in Media of the Year category at the Megafest Business Leadership awards. He was the Platinum winner, edging other peers in the media industry for the top award. The special recognition was for Mdzungairi’s versatility and astute business personality. “I thank the organisers for recognising our hard work. This industry is about team work and so this recognition is an acknowledgement of the work that is being done by the team at NewsDay,” Mdzungairi said in his acceptance speech. “We are humbled by your show of support and we hope to keep up the high standard of the work that has led to this recognition.” Guest of honour at the awards, businessman Luxon Zembe, while congratulating the winners, said organisations needed leaders who were able to act quickly and calmly amid the chaos in Zimbabwe’s economy. “It is gratifying to note that even under our extreme economic weather conditions, Zimbabwe has corporate leaders who measure up to the challenges of today’s business environment, as evidenced by the leadership awards we are all gathered here for tonight. “They are trendsetters and torchbearers who have refused to be victims, but rather, victors. They have refused to be timid and intimidated by whatever hostile forces, and boldly face the Goliath of our operating environment like David,” Zembe said. The awards, which consisted of nearly 20 categories, honoured and recognised outstanding contribution in the business sector. Among the winners included Honour Mkushi of Sawyer and Mkushi Legal Practitioners, who took the award of Outstanding Advocate and Legal Leader of the Year. “This award came to me as a complete, but pleasant surprise after practising law for more than 46 years with a completely clean professional record and support of fellows in the profession, I am truly delighted. I am proud of the fact that I have provided six judges to the Supreme and High Courts of Zimbabwe,” he said upon receiving his award. Other recipients were Harare town clerk Hosiah Chisango, among others.