BY WINSTONE ANTONIO SOUTH AFRICA-BASED Zimbabwean hip-hop artiste Ngonidzashe “King 98” Dondo (pictured) yesterday said he would leave no stone unturned in his ambitious crusade to put Zimbabwe on the global map. King 98 said his string of collaborations with regional music heavy weights including Nigerian superstar David “Davido” Adeleke, South Africa’s hip-hop sensation Nasty C and Mozambican award-winning hip-hop sensation Edson Abel Jeremias Tchamo were part of those concerted efforts. The 21-year-old singer told NewsDay Life & Style ahead of his Wacko video release today that he was optimistic about the future of local hip hop. “I am pleased to announce to my fans that the wait is finally over as I will be dropping the much-awaited Wacko video tomorrow (today) on video platform YouTube which I collaborated with my brothers from South Africa and Mozambique,” he said. He said after the YouTube release, the video will be played on several regional televisions channels including Zambia National Broadcasting Corporation (ZNBC) ZNBC TV1 and TV2, ZBCTV, and other music channels such as Channel O, MTV Base and TRACE Africa. The video, featuring Nasty C and Tshamo, was taken off his debut album Francesca. King 98 said he was humbled to have combined his voice with Nasty C and Tshamo on the video who he all described as professional artistes determined to also uplift talent. The Shoko hitmaker said he was determined to put the hip-hop genre on the international map. “I have realised that very little attention is being given to our hip-hop genre, so that is motivating me in efforts to give the genre more visibility both in
the country and beyond the borders,” he said. King 98 said he was happy with the response he was getting in the region following his recent performances in Zambia and Mozambique. King 98 said the Wacko video was shot by South African Nate Thomas while compatriot GT Beats, who is also based in Mzansi, produced the song. Apart from the international artistes, King 98 has also collaborated with ExQ. He is currently riding high with his debut 15-track album, Francesca,  featuring Davido and Nasty C.