BY TAKEMORE MAZURUSE SUNGURA kingpin Alick Macheso (pictured) was treated to a memorable pre-birthday fete before an appreciative crowd at a family show held at Jongwe Corner, Hatfield in Harare on Sunday night. Arts promotion company Aflatronix Promotions led the way with an enormous cake inscribed “Macheso at 51”. while other socialites and big money spenders joined the fray with an assortment of cash and material presents. Aflatronix Promotions spokesperson Clayton Mhike said it was important to honour selfless and legendary artistes like Macheso. “Macheso is a giver and such people rarely get to be spoiled because they worry more about helping than receiving. As an arts stakeholder, we felt compelled to play our part by
organising this surprise celebration for a man who has done a lot in moulding local arts,” Mhike said. The promotions company was also part of Macheso’s 50th birthday celebrations that coincided with the launch of his 11 studio album, Dzinosvika Kure, at Chitungwiza Aquatic Complex in
May last year. “We work with both the upcoming and established artistes, and can safely say we have become close friends of Macheso. We are honoured to show him appreciation in this manner,” Mhike
said. The birthday cake, with a market value of ZWL$2 500, was cut by a beaming Macheso in the presence of his wife Nyadzisai, son Esau as well as daughters Sharon, Ruvarashe and Monalisa,
including the sungura maestro’s grandchildren. South Africa-based socialite Faith “Chihera” Taruvinga, who is part of Aflatronix Promotions, co-ordinated the surprise presence of Macheso’s family at the fete. “We knew he would not expect anything special since the official celebrations were held in his hometown of Shamva on Saturday night,” she said. Macheso’s friends from around Zimbabwe also took time to celebrate him through generous cash and material gifts.
Macheso thanked his family, friends and Aflatronix Promotions for spoiling him. Aflatronix Promotions has worked with various established and upcoming artistes, including Leonard Zhakata, Faheem Somanje, Tocky Vibes and some groups in Rusape, among many, since
2015. Macheso, who was born on June 10, 1968 in Shamva, celebrated his birthday with a return to his former school, Enterprise Primary in Shamva ,where he made some generous donations last
Thursday.