SUCCESS LIFE Jonah Nyoni What someone learnt in a computer science degree four years back might be swiftly getting obsolete because change is moving at breakneck speed. A few years back, 2G was a big thing until we had 3G.  Now we are using 4G, but already the future is pointing towards the 5th Generation of the industrial revolution. What that means is that universities in Zimbabwe have to attune their curricular  to the current needs, or else suffer archaic institutions. It’s unfortunate that most of our learning institutions are churning out degrees that are no longer relevant to the job industry. What that means is the Ministry of Education has to act
swiftly and be pliable to the new changes and needs. Some companies have taken it upon themselves to empower their own employees to be relevant and have the requisite skills needed by industry. The success and relevance of a company is not in its size, but in its ability and the sagacity of its leadership to see the need for employee improvement and the power of idea
generation. Times and tools are changing, and no one wants to be caught off-guard. Most leaders and institutions just assume it’s business as usual. That statement has become so obsolete and
embarrassing to mention. There are some organisations, (NGOs, government, corporations, churches, colleges, universities and social groupings, among many) that I knew about a decade ago, and have still not
improved their infrastructure, let alone their most important asset, the human resource. New players are coming on stage to plug the gap that the old players are failing to. Young leaders are coming up with cutting-edge strategies and solutions. Why? They couldn’t stand the
suppression of talent or potential for greater opportunities. Leaning agility Learning is more than attaining a university degree or qualification, but the ability to be a lifelong learner. How do we learn? We learn through linking with other people who might
know better. Looking around for imminent change and listening to the younger generation because they are so much interested in new inventions is important. Every employee must have this
special hunger to learn and outpace their old ideas.