STARTING a new job is simultaneously exciting and overwhelming. A new job is like a blank book and you are the author, meaning you are the one who determines your stay in that job. Being the new employee on the block is both exciting and nerve-racking as you will have entered an unfamiliar territory filled with new opportunities, but also riddled with drawbacks for those who are unprepared. Starting a new job is anxiety-provoking and takes a lot of perseverance and hard work. With all the challenges new jobs and responsibilities come with, it is important to note that no one ever found success in life without, at some point, taking a leap of faith in their career. It is crucial to note that success during the first weeks or months at a new job is about balance: You want to make great first impressions at the same time trying by all means to fit in that culture, “unlearning and re-learning the new ways of doing things”. The goal is to learn about your new workplace’s existing culture and other areas that are important to learn.  Obviously, at a new workplace you will encounter new people, a new environment and a set of new responsibilities.  There are so many names and faces to memorize, new processes to learn, and you want to make a good impression on all your new co-workers while also impressing your boss. Your first week on the job is an awesome and exciting time, but it can also be pretty scary because there are so many unknowns. You should learn how to smoothly make the switch to your new job, and here are a few tips on surviving your first few weeks or months in your new job: Get there early and know the dress code Starting your day earlier offers many benefits. Plan to arrive early during your first week of employment and even after you have finished your probation period. Employees who get in early are generally perceived as more conscientious and receive higher performance ratings than employees who get in late. Normally, during your first days at work it is crucial to note factors that could make you late, like traffic that you might not be used to or the distance to your new work location. You would not want to be the last one to arrive, especially when it is your first days at work, so you would rather be the first one. More so on dressing; figuring out dress standards at a new workplace can be tough at first. New hires do not want to look too casual, at the same time overdressed. In general, it is better to wear a nice decent formal provided the company wears formal. A “professional dress” refers to a certain level of formality in the way someone is expected to dress at their workplace. The issue of dressing varies because at some companies, they wear uniforms or casual clothes, so it will be important to ask the moment you get the new job so that you will not become a mismatch to the existing team on your first day. Understand the company Understanding the company entails familiarising yourself with the products or services it provides, regardless of your role in the company. It is important to fit as well in the new culture of your new job so that you will not face any problems. Your first week on the job is the time to really listen and absorb new information. Before acting in your new job, you need to understand the basics of how the office operates and who reports to who, among other things. Even though you are going to have questions in the future, the more you write down and understand during your first week, the more you will become acceptable and fit in the new culture. Start building relationships Your first week on the job may be the most time you will ever have at the office to get to know your co-workers, your supervisors and managers as well. You should take advantage of your orientation to know who does what and who reports to who. Start conversations whenever you meet a new person, and do not be afraid to put yourself out there.  Establish a common ground with everyone you meet, but please, be cautioned not to discuss co-workers with others as you do not know their relationship or cliques at work. When you build a strong relationship at your new job, it will be easy for you to fit in that culture. Establish expectations with your boss In the first weeks or months, you are supposed to know what your boss is looking for and be in a position to adjust to the expectations. Actually, you need to make sure that you are on the same page in terms of what is expected of you and how your success will be measured at your new work. This includes understanding how you will work together, how you will get the resources you need to do your job well, and how your job performance will be assessed. Your first week at work is the perfect time for questions, but ask questions at the right time and in a proper manner which does not humiliate your superiors. Learn office politics and avoid gossip Office politics are a part of every office and can make or break you at your job. Proper etiquette skills and rules to new employees are that before jumping in with new ideas and critiques, it is vital to understand how the office works and know who you can trust. You should not show or propose ideas as if the existing people do not know what they are doing. You should avoid gossip as you don’t know who is related to who. Be warm and receptive to assistance even if you think you can handle things on your own and do not underrate the processes, procedure or what is happening at your new job: Rather, take time to learn. Learn company policies It is important to note that certain behaviour that is unwelcome to the new organisation will also be stipulated in the company policy so it is important to familiarise yourself with the new company policies. The company manuals and policies are there to guide everyone what they can, should, and can’t do in the performance of their tasks. Even though you are a new employee, make sure that you do not violate company policies. Never use your ignorance of these policies as an excuse, as it is your job to inquire about and follow them. Be willing to try new things and work hard When you are a new employee, you should be humble and open-minded. A new job is not just a new opportunity for professional growth, but also for personal growth. You will meet new people, be subject to a new set of rules, new leadership style, and perhaps even a new working schedule. Be willing to try new things just as how you were willing to submerge yourself in your new job. Be adventurous enough to accept and adapt to them. By trying out new things, you not only get to meet other people, but also learn about yourself and discover new things that you never knew you would like. When you are new to your job, remember you only get one chance to make a good first impression that will enable you to remain with the company even after your probation. Live up to all the good stuff you wrote in your resume and what you will have said during the interview and try to fit in the existing culture in that organisation.  Emmanuel Zvada is a human capital consultant and an international recruitment expert. He writes in his personal capacity.