SOUTH Africa National First Division relegated side Witbank Spurs owe former Highlanders midfielder King Nadolo R37 500 in unpaid salaries. BY FORTUNE MBELE According to media reports in South Africa, his agent Basil Tamangani has accused club owner Themba Mafu of unprofessionalism after Witbank Spurs was ordered to pay the player his dues. Tamangani is quoted saying Nadolo has only been paid his salary in full once or twice since joining Witbank Spurs in January last year after his contract with Highlanders expired in December 2017. “We have tried to follow the right procedures to have this matter resolved by reporting this matter to the South African Football Players’ Union (SAFPU), but we hit snag. The case was taken to a hearing where King (Nadolo) was misinformed and made to sign a settlement agreement contract which fell way too short of what Mafu owes the player. Even having signed what seems to be a dodgy contract, we still haven’t received any payment, which in this case was due to be paid last week,” Tamangani said. The agent says the union has not been forthcoming in availing Nadolo’s contract with Witbank Spurs and he (Tamangani) could not attend the hearing due to poor health. He states that Nadolo wants to return to Zimbabwe and have a fresh start after the nasty experience at Witbank Spurs. However, SAFPU secretary-general Taelo Calvin Motloung is also quoted in the same report, acknowledging the matter was taken to the Labour Court. Motloung said they did everything they were supposed to do as a union when the matter was brought before them and after some time, the case was heard at the Labour Court and the order for Nadolo to be paid R37 500, was granted.
“We did that. We filed everything, but then he did not have a copy of the contract. That’s another thing. So, I had to apply for the copy of the contract to the league. It takes time also. They don’t just give it to you. So it took longer than it was supposed to. He made it worse by not having a copy of the contract. … the order was that they are going to pay him R37 500. Since he is a foreigner, we have to refer the case to Fifa like we usually do with others. For foreigners, their cases are handled by Fifa,” Motloung said. He said going to Fifa would take long for the case to be settled.