BY TERRY MADYAUTA CHAPUNGU . . . . . (0) (1) TELONE . . . . . . . . . (0) (1) AIRFORCE side Chapungu squandered an opportunity of keeping up pressure on the Castle Lager Premier Soccer League pace-setters following their draw against TelOne at Mandava Stadium yesterday. It was a balanced battle for bragging rights between the two rivals, though Chapungu created more chances compared to their opponents. Rookie goal-minder Rapheal Pitisi was the shining star for TelOne, producing a number of brilliant saves for the WiFi Boys. TelOne lost Fredrick Muza in the first half to injury, and was replaced by Jacob Muzokomba, who hardly got clean supply upfront. However, Chapungu took the initiative on the 56th-minute mark when they were awarded a penalty after Trust Nyabinde was adjudged to have handled the ball in the box. Allen Tavarwisa cleverly fired home from the spot, thrusting his side ahead. Their lead was short-lived as the stubborn WiFi Boys levelled scores five minutes later, in similar fashion after they were also awarded a penalty when Herbert Rusawo impeded Tatenda Mangesi. Muzokomba converted to keep TelOne in the game. Moments before full-time, Chapungu were reduced to 10 men after captain Collen Kwaramba was red-carded, after picking a second yellow card. Chapungu coach Rodwell Dhlakama felt his side should have won the match. “I felt that we had the upper hand in this encounter and we could have won it had we scored some of the chances we created,” he said. “We were playing a good side that plays with a lot of purpose and it is good to go home with a point from this derby.” His counterpart Jairos Tapera was satisfied with the result, considering that they were coming from a defeat at the hands of Highlanders. “We could have scored two goals or more, but overall, the result is good for us considering that we were playing a derby, which is a high pressure game,” he said. TEAMS CHAPUNGU: H Rusawo, P Gumbo, H Mugoniwa, C Kwaramba, B Mbavarira, M Muchingami, I Nyoni, G Mleya, Tavarwisa(P Marufu, 74’), B Mugoni( P Khumbula, 54’), N Hunga TELONE: R Pitisi, T Nyabinde, T Chikore, I Zambezi, F Muza, S Phiri, E Mandiranga, J James, E Zinyama, M Ponyera ( B Sibanda, 57’), D Mangesi