Warriors coach Sunday Chidzambga’s plans for the highly-anticipated Group A Africa Cup of Nations curtain raiser between Zimbabwe and Egypt at the Cairo International Stadium on Friday night encountered a major blow following the injury to midfielder Tafadzwa Kutinyu, who was billed for a starting berth. BY KEVIN MAPASURE Chidzambga’s plans for the Egypt match were also thrown off the rails after it was also confirmed yesterday that the former Chicken Inn midfielder will not be able to recover in time to take part in the tournament. “I can confirm that Kutinyu is going to miss the whole tournament due to a knee injury that he suffered. We have had some tests and the results have not gone in our favour and it’s unfortunate that the player can no longer take part in this tournament,” Warriors manager Wellington Mupandare told NewsDay Sport from Cairo. Zimbabwe will present the medical report to Confederation of African Football (Caf) so that they can be able to make a replacement and it’s likely that Rodwell Chinyengetere could be in with a chance to replace Kutinyu. The technical team was set to meet after yesterday evening’s training session to consider a replacement for the player who is set to begin a career at Guinea side Horoya Athletic Club. “The next step is for the technical team to meet and consider a replacement after our training session this evening. This is something that we had not envisaged, so we will have to sit over it and see who we can bring in. We will have to present our medical report to Caf so that they can ascertain if we can be allowed to make a replacement. From what the report says, that should not be a problem.” Chidzambga would have to re-draw his plans for the starting line-up in a match the Warriors will be looking to at least avoid defeat and give themselves a better chance of making it through to the knockout stage of the competition. Barring the duo of captain Knowledge Musona and Khama Billiat, who are certain starters, the other attacking midfielders in the squad include Talent Chawapihwa, Kuda Mahachi and vice-captain Ovidy Karuru. There was an injury concern for attacker Billiat, but the Kaizer Chiefs star has since been certified fit for the opener against the more fancied hosts.
It will be interesting how Chidzambga will choose to set up his team for this one, whether he will go with three holding midfielders and three attackers upfront or be brave enough to play just two at the base of the midfield. One of the players that might have suffered a heart break by initially missing out on the final squad, especially from those that played at the Cosafa tournament may benefit. After the Egypt game, Zimbabwe’s next assignment is against Uganda on Wednesday, while their final Group A instalment will come against the Democratic Republic of Congo on June 30. The top two teams from the six pools earn automatic tickets to the Round of 16, while four of the third-placed teams will tag along. Warriors Afcon squad Goalkeepers: George Chigova, Edmore Sibanda, Elvis Chipezeze.

Defenders: Tendayi Darikwa, Jimmy Dzingai, Divine Lunga, Teenage Hadebe, Alec Mudimu, Ronald Pfumbidzai.

Midfielders: Marshall Munetsi, Marvelous Nakamba, Danny Phiri, Ovidy Karuru, Kuda Mahachi, Talent Chawapihwa, Khama Billiat, Knowledge Musona, Tafadzwa Kutinyu, Thabani Kamusoko.

Strikers: Nyasha Mushekwi, Tino Kadewere, Evans Rusike, Knox Mutizwa