BY FORTUNE MBELE Having led championship-chasing Caps United to a win over Highlanders at the weekend, Lloyd Chitembwe this week leads relegation-threatened Harare City to Barbourfields Stadium for another clash with Mandla Mpofu. He was in charge at Caps United in April when his side shared the spoils with Highlanders in a goalless draw at Barbourfields Stadium. After days of speculation, Chitembwe crossed the floor to Harare City and this time around his mission is to save the Sunshine City Boys from relegation and his first task is meeting Highlanders at Emagumeni in a league match on
Sunday. Chitembwe moved with his entire backroom staff to Harare City, who are wallowing in the relegation zone following a dismal run after the departure of Englishman Mark Harrison last month and have lost their last four games under
caretaker coach Mark Mathe, plunging to a precarious position 15. Mpofu relishes meeting Chitembwe again. “It’s quite interesting that I am facing the same technical team, but different team that Chitembwe is coaching now,” Mpofu said. “Obviously it’s not going to be easy for us considering that usually when a new man comes into the job, everyone within the system will try to put maximum effort in terms of application. Everyone will try to impress the new man.
Harare City will come with the entire arsenal; they have to make sure they get something from Highlanders. They want to prove a point to the new boss, but as Highlanders we are ready for them. The response after losing to Caps
United has been good and there has been a good approach since we started training,” Mpofu said. He admitted Chitembwe is a shrewd tactician, but Bosso are looking to collect all the three points. Before the loss to Caps United, Highlanders had played three draws and won two times. “I know Harare City have not been playing well, but it is not going to be easy for us. I think if we can continue from the second half performance against Caps United and considering we will be playing at home, I think it will be
very difficult for Harare City to get anything from us. I am meeting an astute tactician, he has done his homework and I have done mine and Harare City have got good players. It’s going to be an exciting game and we need to get
three points from that game.” He welcomed back defensive midfielder Nqobizitha Masuku from suspension while winger Cleopas Kapupurika is still out injured. Denzel Khumalo, who was reportedly involved in a near fist fight with welfare manager last week, is part of the team and Mpofu said he could be in the squad to face Harare City on Sunday.