Ambitious Premier Soccer league side Ngezi Platinum have sensationally snapped former Warriors and FC Platinum defensive linkman Gerard Takwara, who they unveiled along with four other players including former Chicken Inn forward Mitchell Katsvairo in Harare yesterday. BY MUNYARADZI MADZOKERE Other players signed by the Mhondoro-Ngezi-based platinum miners that were unveiled to the media yesterday are Arial Makopa formerly with Yadah FC, Billy Vheremu who has been promoted from the club’s Ngezi Under-19 team and Everson Feremba, who they snapped from Northern Region Division One side Cranborne Bullets. But it is Takwara’s capture that is going to send shockwaves throughout the local league. Takwara, popularly known as “The General” was one of the most exciting defensive midfield prospects in local football a couple of years back before he moved to Ajax Cape Town in South Africa. The player was released by the South African side last week after an unsuccessful one and a half year stint. Club president Stanley Segula believes the capture of Takwara will help the club’s quest to land their maiden league championship at the end of the season. “Our aspiration is undying. We don’t change our targets mid-season, the title still remains our aspiration and with six points off the mark we are still within reach so we are still gunning for the title. And with the new ammunition we have brought in it clearly show that our target hasn’t changed,” Segula said. “From the last two matches we have played the team has regained its composure something we are excited about. The coach also has been asking for additional resources and we have got youthfulness in the team and with the new signing we are bringing regional experience. We believe that with what we have already, we are within reach of the league title,” he added. Ngezi currently sit fifth on the log standings with 25 points in 16 matches, six behind leaders and fellow platinum miners FC Platinum. The Erol Akbay-coached side has not lost a match in the league since May 11, when they lost 1 – 0 away to Kariba, 10 matches ago. Last weekend, Ngezi made a huge statement of intent after beating CAPS United at the National Sports Stadium.
Dutchman Akbay was excited with the new signings. “We are happy because these five boys will make the team strong and it gives us the opportunity to change tactics which was difficult in the past. We have good players in Gerard’s position but now with him we want a stronger player and also to play a little bit differently.  I hope he (Takwara) can give us what we want. Akbay also maintained that he is targeting the championship with Ngezi Platinum. “The target has not changed; we are still going for the championship we are six points behind the log leaders. And every week we are getting better and that means it’s becoming difficult for the teams in front of us to become champion,” he said. Ngezi host Harare City at the Baobab on Saturday. Castle Lager Premier Soccer League fixtures Tomorrow: Yadah v Mushowani Stars (Rufaro) Saturday: Herentals v Bulawayo Chiefs (National Sports Stadium), Dynamos v Triangle (Rufaro), Ngezi Platinum Stars v Harare City (Baobab), ZPC Kariba v Hwange (Nyamhunga), FC Platinum v Caps United (Mandava), Manica Diamonds v Black Rhinos (Vengere) Wednesday: TelOne v Chicken Inn (TBA), Highlanders v Chapungu (Barbourfields)