BY FARAI MATIASHE A TEAM of South Korean tour operators and buyers is set to visit the majestic Victoria Falls and Hwange National Park ahead of the Sanganani/Hlanganani Tourism Expo to be held in Bulawayo next month.
The operators’ experience in the country will help market destination Zimbabwe back home and in the Asian continent at large. Cheng Shipak, who is among the buyers from South Korea, confirmed that they had booked for a pre-tour ahead of the world expo, which would take them to some of the country’s best tourist attractions. “We are attending Sanganai/Hlanganani as buyers and looking forward to meeting the rest of the world at this tourism exchange. We want to enhance our knowledge and experience about the destination. We have since
booked to take part in a pre-tour that covers the mighty Victoria Falls, Hwange National Park, Bulawayo and Harare,” he said. “We insist on collaborating with tour companies in Zimbabwe and southern Africa as a whole, thereby driving the tourist traffic from South Korea and Asia at large.” Victoria Falls-based tour operator Barbara Murasiranwa, said she was hopeful that the 12th edition of Sanganai/Hlanganani would live up to expectations. “We are very ready as a tourism industry and are expecting to meet up with a lot of buyers who will bring Zimbabwe as a destination back on the map. When the buyers come and buy from Zimbabwe  or South Africa or
Uganda or any other country within the region, it builds confidence for the buyers or source markets to say we’ve seen what they have in store,” she said. Murasiranwa said there were going to be some familiarization tours, where they receive buyers and show them what they have in terms of hotels and other activities. Zimbabwe Tourism Authority spokesperson, Godfrey Koti, confirmed that over 250 exhibitors had registered, with about 20 countries having confirmed their participation, including India, China, Nigeria, Zambia, South
Africa, Botswana and Mozambique. “This is going to be a three-day event in which we are trying to promote Zimbabwe for Meetings, Incentives Conferences and Exhibitions (MICE). We are promoting Zimbabwe as a MICE destination, where people come
and converge. They must also take this opportunity to do business. We want to use this event to further promote that idea, especially with the fact that this exposition is registered under the United Nations
World Tourism Organisation calendar,” he said.