BY HENRY MHARA WARRIORS star Marvelous Nakamba yesterday completed his dream move to English Premiership side Aston Villa, becoming the fifth Zimbabwean to play in the Premier League, arguably the best league in the world. The English club announced the capture of the 25-year-old Warriors star yesterday afternoon, which is their 12th signing at Villa Park this transfer window. He joined the club on the same day as England international Tom Heaton. Villa did not disclose the length and financial details of the contract, but NewsDay Sport has it on good authority that Nakamba signed a five-year contract,
with the club paying Club Brugge more than £11 million for the Warriors midfielder. In his first interview with the club, Nakamba described himself as a “marvellous player,” and expressed his delight in joining the “best league in the world”. “For me to be here, it feels fantastic,” Nakamba told Aston Villa’s website. “I’m looking forward to playing against some of the best players in the Premier League, one of the best leagues in the world. It’s a dream for me to be
competing among the best players in the world.” Asked to describe the sort of a player he is, and the qualities that he brings to Villa, Nakamba quipped: “I’m a marvellous player. I’m a midfielder who can
give everything for the team every time, and also fight for the team.” Nakamba becomes the second player to join Villa from the Belgian league team this European summer after Wesley Moras. He says the presence of a familiar face in the dressing room will help him settle in at the new club. “He told me many things about Aston Villa, many positive things. He was very positive about the club and he spoke with me every time when I was home telling me
the good things. To share the same dressing room with him is something that I’m very happy about.” In his rising career, Nakamba has played in the lower leagues in France, and the top-flight in the Netherlands and Belgium, but he reckons the English
Premiership is the best. “Personally, I take this as the best league in the world, so I’m very happy and hopefully, I will try my best and give everything for the team,” he said. The former Bantu Rovers player also paid utmost compliment to Villa coach Dean Smith, who pulled all stops to get the Zimbabwe international to Birmingham. “He is really a fantastic and excellent coach. He spoke with me about everything about the club and what he expects from me. Hopefully, I will learn more from him, and grow as a player and to pay back his trust by giving everything to the club. “The training pitches here are also fantastic, and the people have been excellent. They are welcoming me and I feel happy to be part of that family.” Smith returned the favour and spoke about his admiration for the midfielder. “Marvelous fits the criteria of the type of player we were looking for. He’s very mobile, he has very good in possession, and he will fit in with our style of play,” he said. Aston Villa are away to Tottenham in the first match on their return to the topflight, which kicks off in just under a fortnight, which would somewhat be a
tough welcome for Nakamba and Smith. “I’m looking forward to the match, and giving everything for the club,” Nakamba said. The Warriors star becomes the fifth Zimbabwean to feature in the English Premiership after goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar, Peter Ndlovu, Benjani Mwaruwari and
Tendayi Darikwa.