BULAWAYO-based Victory Siyanqoba director, poet and activist Desire “Moyoxide” Moyo will be part of a stellar line-up at South African poet and activist Mzwakhe Mbuli’s 60th birthday celebrations set for today at Soweto Theatre in South Africa. BY SHARON SIBINDI IN JOHANNESBURG Mbuli will be honoured by the Mahlomola Kekana Foundation for his contribution to the South African and global arts and culture industry. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style yesterday, Moyoxide said he was inspired by Mbuli, who he will present with a poem titled Dear Mzwakhe: From Bulawayo to Soweto With Love. “I grew up listening to the works of the people’s poet, (Mbuli). His creative wisdom, him being a social commentator, fearlessly tackling undemocratic and repressive elements by the apartheid regime, ignited the Moyoxide in me,” he said. “Mzwakhe has always gone deeper into my heart and mind. He has no relations with Satanic, demonic laws and elements that imprison people’s rights and freedoms. I was inspired and still am inspired, not only by his wordsmith tactic, but also by his sound voice that shakes the conscience of human kind.” Moyoxide said Zimbabwean poets have a greater responsibility of mobilising support for the country. “It is not a privilege, but a greater responsibility being just and genuine ambassadors of the ailing and sinking country (Zimbabwe). I believe as poets, we need such spaces to meet up with the world, share experiences and ideas, stories and opportunities,” he said. “I am performing in solidarity with my mentor. My big man, I am happy and looking forward to tell Zimbabwe’s bleak story so that the world can understand the disease we are suffering from. That disease is well expressed in the poem that I will present today.” Moyoxide said the poem celebrates Mzwakhe Mbuli’s 60 years of survival in the struggle, detentions and dirty works pressed upon him. “Years of success, glitz, glory and expression; then comes Bulawayo’s message to the south-western townships of Gauteng. The message is all seeking support and solidarity to Inzalo ka Mzilikazi, and King Shaka’s best-man,” he said. Moyoxide will share the stage with celebrated songbird Rebecca Malope and Nkunzi from Uzalo, among others.