BY FORTUNE MBELE HIGHLANDERS coach Mandla Mpofu’s right-back headache could be over following the return of  McClive Phiri who has been cleared by the team doctors to resume action following an injury. Phiri could be available for Wednesday’s Premier Soccer League game against Chapungu at Barbourfields Stadium. He fractured his right humerus, the bone between the elbow and shoulder, in the goalless draw against Herentals at Barbourfields Stadium on May 19 and has been out of action since then after undergoing surgery. Team doctor Shepherd Khumalo said it is now up to coaches to start using him. “McClive Phiri is now training with the team. He is cleared on our side. Whether he will be there in the next game depends on the coaches and on his match
fitness,” Khumalo said. Phiri started full training with the rest of the team on Wednesday. Another Highlanders right-back Bukhosi Ncube is due for surgery after he exacerbated a knee injury in April when the Bulawayo giants lost 1-0 to Triangle at
Barbourfields Stadium in a game he only lasted 17 minutes. Highlanders spokesperson Ronald Moyo yesterday confirmed that Ncube is due to visit a specialist to map the way forward regarding his surgery. “We are waiting to hear from the specialist. The only challenge is that the surgeon spends most of his time in Harare and only comes to Bulawayo for a week.
After Bukhosi (Ncube) sees the specialist this week, then we will know the way forward, but the player is due for surgery,” Moyo said. There had been indications that Ncube, who has had the nagging knee injury since April last year, would be deregistered during the mid-season transfer window
period, but he is still registered. At the end of June, the team doctor indicated that a magnetic resonance imaging scan conducted on the former Young Warriors’ player had picked an injury to the
meniscus (cartilage that provides a cushion between the thighbone and shinbone). Khumalo said the defender could be due for an arthroscopy (a surgical technique in which a tube-like instrument is inserted into a joint to inspect, diagnose
and repair tissues). Andrew Mbeba played the right-back position during Phiri and Ncube’s absence, while Charlton Siamalonga also had a run in the position in the matches against
FC Platinum at home and Manica Diamond.