By Tinashe Mungazi Hwange . . . . . . . . . . . . (0) 1 FC PLATINUM . . . . . . . . (1) 1 FC Platinum coach Norman Mapeza was left seething with anger over a disallowed goal, a red card against his striker Gift Mbweti and a penalty decision that went against his side in this eventful clash against Hwange at the Colliery yesterday. The draw means the champions lost their place at the top of the log standings, which has been taken over by 2016 champions Caps United, with a handful of matches still to play. Striker Perfect Chikwende had given the visiting side an ideal start with a second minute goal when he connected a cross from roving rightback Raphael Mudhuviwa. The Zvishavane-based side continued to dominate their hosts afterwards with goalkeeper Taimon Mvula subjected to incessant attacks. Hwange’s first real chance came in the 25th minute when Kasimero Chimbadzwa’s attempt was deflected by goalkeeper Petros Mhari. Three minutes after the break, the hosts were awarded a penalty when Chimbadzva was brought down by Never Tigere. Enerst Gwitima converted with ease to give his side an equaliser. The goal looked to reinvigorate Chipangano who started to dictate the pace with Gwitima and Ted Ncube giving the opposition defenders a tough time. Then there was drama just before the stoppage time when Mbweti had the ball in the back of the net, but the referee disallowed the effort saying the striker had used his hand. Mbweti, already sitting on a yellow card from an earlier infringement, was shown a second and sent off by referee Mhaka Magama. A melee ensued as the FC Platinum bench led by Mapeza protested the decision, but the match officials stood their ground. Mapeza was not amused and he made his concerns clear. “It’s not good for football to have such type of officiating. These guys (referees) are from here (Hwange). Instead of enjoying the game, the opposite was true because of the way it was handled,” Mapeza said. Hwange coach Nation Dube said he was happy with the result given that his boys were fatigued as a result of their travelling. “I can give my boys a pat on the back because they did well considering the travelling that we are doing. I think fatigue is taking its toll on them. Unlike FC Platinum who have got a lot of players who they can change anytime, otherwise the boys played well,” said Dube.