BY FORTUNE MBELE THE Zifa Southern Region is investigating a matter in which their Division One League title contenders Talen Vision are accused of attempting to bribe ZPC Hwange players to sway in their favour the results of their match played last week. The bribery allegations involve US$100 and ZPC Hwange have since filed an official letter of complainant with the responsible office regarding the matter. The power utility side alleges that the game, which ended in a 0-0 draw at Chakona Stadium in Hwange last Saturday, was played under unfair conditions as members of Talen Vision’s technical team contacted some of their players
prior to the match, one of their players received the said US$100 from a “broker” who asked to be linked with three other players. The unnamed player who received the cash is said to have been updating his officials on the goings-on and the intermediary was ambushed and is said to have made a confession that he had been sent by Talen Vision. Zifa Southern Region board member competitions Fiso Siziba yesterday confirmed that the office has been alerted of the matter which is now under investigation and likely going to the disciplinary committee. “I am not in the office, but I am sure we have received the letter. We will initiate an investigation and will demand reports from the players concerned and we hope ZPC Hwange will avail the players that were involved. Definitely,
the case will be handled by the disciplinary committee. We will also demand an official report from Talen Vision and we will assist the disciplinary committee with whatever information that they will need to put the issue to
rest,” Siziba said. Talen Vision have distanced themselves from the bribery scam. Meanwhile, competition in the league goes ahead with Talen Vision on 34 points from 16 games and dropping to position two on the log-standings after the goalless draw, taking on Mosi Rovers at Luveve Stadium this afternoon. Bulawayo City (35 points) who reclaimed the top spot after beating CIWU 3-1 are inactive this weekend while ZPC Hwange on 29 points will be in Bulawayo tomorrow against Arenel Movers at Gifford High School. Fixtures Today: Talen Vision v Mosi Rovers (Luveve 12pm), Bosso 90 v Casmyn (Luveve) Tomorrow: CIWU v Makomo (Crescent 12pm), Toronto v Indlovu Iyanyathela (Mzilikazi Barracks 12pm), Arenel Movers v ZPC Hwange (Gifford), Mainline v Ajax Hotspurs (Plumtree) Sunday: Binga Pirates v Moto Moto (Binga) Matches start at 3pm unless stated.