BY DEMETRIA MANYONGA ZIMBABWE Musicians’ Union president Edith WeUtonga has apologised to victims of Cyclone Idai for musicians’ failure to play an educative role in spreading messages around the disaster through music. Cyclone Idai has been declared a national disaster and rescue efforts are currently underway in Manicaland and Masvingo provinces. Addressing a Press conference in Harare on Tuesday to announce tomorrow’s free concert aimed at fundraising for the Cyclone Idai victims, the afro-jazz songbird said: “I want to apologise on behalf of other artistes that as musicians we have failed to communicate the message through music and alert people the same way social media has done. We have to rectify the mistake made.” Several artistes across genres will this afternoon perform at a free show dubbed Cyclone Relief Concert in order to fundraise for Cyclone Idai victims.
The show is set for the Julius Nyerere Parkade in Harare. “A number of artistes among them Jah Prayzah, Sulumani Chimbetu, Baba Shupi, Wanai and Sandra Ndebele are set to perform at this gig, which is going to be the first show as other several ones will follow, and are to cater for those who cannot make it to the central business district on Friday (today),” she said. Artistes across genres have since joined hands on different initiatives as a way to garner support for the cyclone victims. Meanwhile, Comic Pastor is organising a comedy show so that he also fundraises for the victims. “We are one and we should help each other, I am putting up a  comedy show on March 29 at Rainbow Towers where comedians such as Brian, Ian Phiri and Patrick, among others, shall perform. Everyone is free to come; one can bring anything which can help our Chimanimani friends and relatives,” he said. Sungura maestro and Red Cross humanitarian ambassador Alick Macheso said: “My thoughts are with the victims of Cyclone Idai. Let’s join hands and make a difference. Remember, there is never too small an effort for humanitarian work. What you many consider as small maybe very useful to the next person.” Jah Prayzah has saluted those who donated through his SOS call.