by ABC  Alex Jacquot sent a handwritten note to chief executive Alan Joyce saying he had already taken the first steps in starting an airline and was wondering what to do next. “I have already started some stuff like what type of planes I’ll need, flight numbers, catering and more,” Alex wrote. “I’m the CEO of the airline, which by the way is called Oceania Express.” He implored Mr Joyce to “please take [him] seriously” as he and his friend — who is also the co-founder — had already hired a chief financial officer as well as heads of IT, maintenance, on-board services and legal. But he had three questions about being in charge of an airline. “Number one: I like working on my airline, seeing as it is the school holidays, I have more time to work, but I don’t have anything to do (that I can think of). Do you have any ideas of what I can do? Seeing as you are the CEO of Qantas, I thought I’d ask you.”
“Number two: Do you have any tips on starting an airline? I’d be very grateful to know what you’d have to say.”
“Number three: I’m thinking, as you are, about an A350 for Sydney/Melbourne to London flights. Seeing as it is a 25-hour flight, we are having a lot of trouble thinking about sleep. Do you have any advice?”
Joyce invites Australia’s youngest CEO to a meeting of minds
Mr Joyce got back to Jacquot on February 19. “Thank you for letting me know about your new airline,” he wrote on his official Qantas stationery. “I had heard some rumours of another entrant in the market, so I appreciate you taking the time to write. Qantas chief executive officer Alan Joyce speaks at a lectern at the company annual general meeting, held in Brisbane.
PHOTO: Alan Joyce invited Alex Jacquot to a meeting about a new Qantas project. (ABC News: Tim Swanston)
“First, I should say that I’m not typically in the business of giving advice to my competitors. Your newly appointed head of legal might have something to say about that too. “But I’m going to make an exception on this occasion, because I too was once a young boy who was so curious about flight and all its possibilities.” Mr Joyce offered up some sage advice and, in the process, delivered a masterclass in seizing an opportunity to weave advertising into a cute post that would go viral on social media. He wrote about Qantas’s dedication to safety and making travel “as comfortable and affordable as possible for your passengers”, before speaking about the airline’s Project Sunrise, “which is our plan to fly passengers non-stop between the east coast of Australia and London”. “I would like to invite you to a Project Sunrise meeting between myself, as the CEO of Australia’s oldest airline, and you, as the CEO of Australia’s newest airline,” Mr Joyce wrote. He said he would be in touch about finding a time for the high-powered meeting. Alex Jacquot’s full letter: Dear Mr Alan Joyce AO, I’m Alex Jacquot, a 10-year-old boy (please take me seriously) and I want to start an airline. I have already started some stuff like what type of planes I’ll need, flight numbers, catering and more. I’m the CEO of the airline, which by the way is called Oceania Express. I’ve also hired a CFO, a head of IT, a head of maintenance, a head of on-board services and a head of legal. As well, along with my friend (vice-CEO). We are both co-founders. I wanted to write to you because I wanted to ask you three things. Number one: I like working on my airline, seeing as it is the school holidays, I have more time to work, but I don’t have anything to do (that I can think of). Do you have any ideas of what I can do? Seeing as you are the CEO of Qantas, I thought I’d ask you. Number two: Do you have any tips on starting an airline? I’d be very grateful to know what you’d have to say. Number three: I’m thinking, as you are, about an A350 for Sydney/Melbourne to London flights. Seeing as it is a 25-hour flight, we are having a lot of trouble thinking about sleep. Do you have any advice? Hope to hear from you soon! Yours sincerely, Alex Jacquot — CEO and co-founder of Oceania Express.