BY FORTUNE MBELE PPC Matopos’ 33-Miler ultra-marathon continues to grow in leaps and bounds as organisers of the race have poured in close to ZWR$50 000 in sponsorship package this year compared to last year’s $16 000. This year’s race will be held on April 6. Winners of this year’s grueling 53km race will each pocket ZWR$3 000 compared to the $1 000 that was the prize money from last year’s race that attracted over 2 000 participants. PPC are this year expecting more than 3 000 participants in the 33-Miler, the 21,1km half marathon, including the 10km and 5km fun runs in which 650 participants have already been confirmed. PPC Zimbabwe managing director Kelibone Masiyane yesterday announced the increase in sponsorship. “The marathon is being held against a backdrop of economic challenges. However, because as PPC we are committed to staging a world class event with added value to the participants, in that regard we have increased the prize money by 150% compared to the previous year,” Masiyane said. Company sales and marketing manager Nkosana Mapuma gave the prize money breakdown. “We have trebled the prizes for the race from last year’s $16 100 to $48 000. All the categories will receive multiplied by three what was on offer last year. The main prize for both ladies and men will jump from $1 000 to ZWR$3 000. This is good news for all the athletes and the community of Bulawayo,” Mapuma said. Masiyane said they were happy to be partnering leading sports timing IT group ChampionChip Africa for electronic timing of the country’s top race, among a host of other strategic partners, including charitable organisation Childline Zimbabwe, who are set to benefit from the proceeds of the race. The Bulawayo Athletics Board is coordinating the competition. “We are happy to be welcoming back all the partners for this year’s marathon.  We have got ChampionChip Africa. These are the people who provide digital electronic timing for the 33-Miler and the 21,1km events, ensuring that the integrity of the race is maintained and automatically rendering as one of the qualifier marathons for the regional races like the Comrades Marathon. We have also adopted again this year running apparel that meets regional and international standards.” Masiyane said. He said PPC would, for the first time this year, also partner ZimParks. “PPC will, for the first time this year, be partnering ZimParks. In an effort to maximise on the natural beauty of Matopo Hills and acknowledge the huge tourism potential that it holds, ZimParks has come on board with discounted accommodation rates at its Maleme Rest Camp, especially for the out-of-town runners and will sponsor three families of four, at any of the national parks around the country. On the charitable side, obviously, the proceeds from the marathon will once again go to Childline Zimbabwe,” he said. ProActive Gym will provide fun fitness and zumba for the athletes after the race.