BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA CAPS United coach Darlington Dodo is relishing the opportunity of facing his former boss Lloyd Chitembwe as the Green Machine clashes with Harare City in a Castle Lager Premiership tie at Rufaro Stadium tomorrow. Chitembwe joined Harare City from Caps a month ago and took with him some of the backroom staff who included Nelson Matongorere while Dodo stayed behind. Caps believe Dodo can fulfil the team’s objective of winning the championship this term. The Green Machine gaffer has managed four points from three matches, presiding over a 4-2 loss to Chapungu before collecting maximum points against Black Rhinos in a 2-1 win while they shared spoils with Bulawayo Chiefs. Dodo is aware a win will see his side shooting back to the top of the table. “Facing Lloyd (Chitembwe), yes, but we will be facing each other from a distance. It is Caps versus Harare City. We are looking forward to a good game. “We are still within our targets and we would love to take our tally to 41 points with a win on Wednesday,” he told reporters ahead of the clash. The Caps coach admitted though  that it would be a tough task against Harare City who have transformed greatly under the stewardship of Chitembwe. Under Chitembwe, they overcame Highlanders 1-0 in Bulawayo in his first game in charge, before dispatching Chapungu 2-0. He however, watched his charges fall 1-0 to army side Black Rhinos. “Certainly, it is not going to be a walk in the park,” he said. “Harare City are an ambitious side under a high-profile coach who was my boss just a few weeks ago. They have improved and it will be a big and tough call on both teams. “I am sure each team will be out to win the derby,” Dodo added. He also said the one-week break had given him time to rectify the mistakes they have been making and reinvigorated the team as they resume the league race. “The break afforded us a chance to work on some areas which we badly needed to rectify. It also afforded an opportunity for our injured players to recuperate. “So far, (Justice) Jangano is recovering well and we will be guided on the way forward by the medical team whether he will be fit for the match,” he said. Although Caps have less injuries and suspensions to worry about, they will be without Valentine Ndaba, who is still nursing an injury.