BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA MANICA Diamonds veteran defender Partson Jaure has warned the Warriors against complacency when Zimbabwe host Lesotho in the final qualifying round of the 2021 African Nations Championships (Chan) football tournament. The Warriors face off Lesotho at the National Sports Stadium on Sunday in a battle for a place at the tournament to be held in Cameroon. The Chan tournament is designed exclusively for home-based players. Jaure captained the side that thumped Mauritius 7-1 on aggregate to progress to the final qualifying round. The former Dynamos captain said Lesotho should be treated with respect as there were no minnows in football anymore. He said it was important for them to win the match at home to go into the second leg away with an advantage. “I think we have to treat Lesotho with respect. There are no small teams anymore. Look at Somalia, they gave us problems and only managed to beat them at the death,” he said. “We should approach the match with caution and need to go to the second leg with a good lead. It’s important to win at home, we can’t afford any other result, otherwise it will be a tall order for us to go through.” Jaure is part of the 26-man provisional squad named by coach Joey Antipas alongside other experienced stars, who include the Highlanders duo of defender Peter Mudhuwa and goalkeeper Ariel Sibanda. The 29-year-old was part of the squad that had a successful campaign which ended with Zimbabwe reaching the semi-finals of the tournament in South Africa in 2014, under the guidance of Ian Gorowa. It was the first time for Zimbabwe to reach the last four of the tournament since its inauguration in Cote d’Ivoire in 2009. Since then, they have qualified for every Chan tournament. The performance by that squad helped several players secure contracts in South Africa. Zimbabwe will be looking to bounce back in the tournament after missing the boat for the first time last year for the tournament held in Morocco following a shock defeat at the hands of Namibia in the qualifiers. Provisional squad: Goalkeepers: 1. Nelson Chadya (Ngezi Platinum Stars)
2. Maxwell Nyamupanedengu (Harare City)
3. Ariel Sibanda (Highlanders)
4. Simbarashe Chinani (Dynamos) Defenders: 5. Peter Muduhwa (Highlanders)
6. MacClive Phiri (Highlanders)
7. Ian Nekati (ZPC Kariba)
8. Xolani Ndlovu (Chicken Inn)
9. Partson Jaure (Manica Diamonds)
10. Nomore Chinyerere (Hwange)
11. Lawrence Mhlanga (FC Platinum) Midfielders: 12. Nqobizitha Masuku (Highlanders)
13. Juan Mutudza (Herentals)
14. Joel Ngodzo (Caps United)
15. Ralph Kawondera (Triangle United)
16. Leeroy Mavunga (Yadah Stars)
17. Valentine Kadonzvo (Chicken Inn)
18. Sipho Ndlovu (Chicken Inn)
19. Ian Nyoni (Chapungu)
20. Tichaona Chipunza (Chicken Inn) Strikers: 21. Never Tigere (FC Platinum)
22. Wellington Taderera (Black Rhinos)
23. William Manondo (Harare City)
24. Prince Dube (Highlanders)
25. Evans Katema (Dynamos)
26. Obriel Chirinda (Chicken Inn)