BY WINSTONE ANTONIO FOLLOWING an outbreak of xenophobic violence in South Africa recently, Shoko Festival director Farai Munroe — popularly known as Comrade Fatso — has said this year’s edition, to be headlined by South African comedienne Celeste Ntuli, will be used as a unifying platform. The country’s biggest and longest running urban culture jubilee, which brings together a diversity of arts and culture disciplines, will be held under the theme Good Vibes Only and will run from September 27 to 29 in Harare and Chitungwiza. Comrade Fatso said the festival’s southern African line up of artistes will bring diversity as well as promote unity among southern African artists and
audiences. “We are really happy to be able to present such a fun and diverse line up to our audience. The headline acts include top South African female comedienne
Celeste Ntuli known for her acting role as Siphokazi in Isibaya who will head a line up of comedians at the Shoko Comedy Night set for REPS Theatre on
September 28,” he said. “Local acts Ti Gonzi and Bazooker will headline Shoko’s main event, the Peace in the Hood Concert at Unit L Community Hall Grounds in Chitungwiza on September
29.” Comrade Fatso said the arts and culture fete remained true to form as it has become synonymous with the use of innovation in delivering entertainment. “The Shoko 2019 edition will be bubbling over with its diverse programming including the iconic main event – Peace in the Hood in Chitungwiza. Another
returning crowd favourite is the Shoko Comedy Night, which will feature top local and international comedians in a hilariously innovative new format,” he said. Artists expected to perform during the festival also include Motswana rapper, Wicked Jono and Zambian poet Ludo. Comrade Fatso said this year’s edition of the festival will take place at multiple venues that include The Hub Unconference at Harare City Library, REPS
Theatre and Unit L Community Hall Grounds in Chitungwiza. Over the years, Shoko festival has provided a platform for hundreds of young Zimbabwean rappers, comedians, musicians and spoken word artists to perform,
collaborate and express themselves through their various artistic talents. The festival also curates cutting-edge collaborations between local and international acts and builds international tours for young Zimbabwean artists.