BY HENRY MHARA Fifa yesterday handed a life ban to player agent Kudzanai Shaba for his alleged involvement in Asian betting syndicates linked to match-fixing. Shaba, who was in 2012 named in a Zifa report as one of the people who were involved in a match fixing scandal dubbed “Asiagate scandal” that involved the Warriors, is part of the nine people found guilty by the Fifa disciplinary committee of violating article 69 paragraph 1 of the Fifa Disciplinary Code (Unlawfully influencing match results). Other officials that have been banned “from taking part in any kind of football-related activity at both national and international level (administrative, sports or any other) for life” are Karlon Murray, Keyeno Thomas (Trinidad and Tobago), Hellings Mwakasungula (Malawi), Ibrahim Kargbo (Sierra Leone), Séïdath Tchomogo (Benin), Leonel Duarte (Cuba) and Mohammad Salim Israfeel Kohistani of Afghanistan. “The formal disciplinary proceedings into the aforementioned individuals stemmed from an extensive investigation into various international matches that Mr Wilson Raj Perumal attempted to manipulate for betting purposes. This large-scale investigation was conducted by Fifa over several years through its Integrity Department and in co-operation with the relevant stakeholders and authorities. The decisions were notified to the individuals concerned today, the date on which the relevant bans come into force,” Fifa said in a statement yesterday. Fifa also banned, for match-fixing, Kenyan player George Owino Audi from taking part in any kind of football-related activity at both national and international level for a period of ten (10) years. In addition, a fine in the amount of CHF15 000 has been imposed upon him. Shaba allegedly worked with Perumal to organise matches for the Warriors between 2007 and 2009 in Asia, specifically for the purpose of betting. Zifa later on set an Ethics Committee which investigated the scandal and over 80 people, including players and officials, were banned.