BY WINSTONE ANTONIO LOCAL upmarket entertainment hub, Solomons Lifestyle Cafe, located in Glen View, Harare, is set to treat its patrons, among them celebrities, socialites and other stakeholders in the showbiz at the “Refusion Xperience” launch party this Friday. The five-star Chisanyama joint, located in Willowvale, which is now under new management, and was officially launched in January last year by South Africa-based Zimbabwean businessman, Solomon Matsa, who is expanding his empire, having earlier set up joints in Kwekwe, with prospects of setting another one in Bulawayo. In an interview with NewsDay Life &Style, the joint’s spokesperson Alexio Gwenzi said the “Refusion” was giving new life to the place, its programmes and services to new and existing patrons. “Our main focus, from the launch going forward, is to give clients a real Chisanyama experience, matching current trends in the region and globally in support of the national vision for growth in the hospitality industry,” he said. “This Friday, our guests at Solomons Lifestyle Cafe will have an opportunity to have an insight on some of the exciting weekly programmes we have in store for our patrons. Efforts have been made to bring the service identity on point and the hospitality experience will be our priority.” Gwenzi said after hosting the invited guests, the refusion launch after-party will be open, for free, to the general public who will be entertained by fast-rising Harare wheelspinners DJ Switch, Arz and P Nut. “At Solomons Lifestyle Café Harare, we are promising a premium venue, always lit with best vibes, which will cater for trendsetters, movers and shakers of this world.  The main focus is quality service and culture that illuminates the true Shisanyama identity,” he said. The Solomons Lifestyle Cafe resembles a creative architecture coupled with exquisite décor as Matsa brought the north experience to the west, which is one of Harare’s high-density suburbs, Glen View. “My vision at Solomons Lifestyle Cafe is to promote local arts as well as township tourism and to have the best,” he said. “Solomon’s Lifestyle Cafe serves typically Zimbabwean traditional meals, but in a modern environment as we literally brought the best of the west and countryside Zimbabwe together.”