BY DEMETRIA MANYONGA THE 18th National Arts Merit Awards (NAMA) held on Saturday at the Harare International Conference Centre (HICC) saw several creatives bagging awards with many others going back home disappointed. Trending musician, Jah Prayzah’s video, Dzamutsana, was voted the Outstanding Video of the year. Before the awards night, the video had been compared to his long-time nemesis Winky D’s MuGarden. After the win, the video producer, Vusi “Blaqs” Hlatshwayo, announced that he was now calling it quits. Gospel musician Janet Manyowa’s hard work continues to pay off after she clinched the Outstanding Female Musician award with her song, Nyasha Nengoni, released in January this year. The race for the Outstanding Male Musician award, pitting ExQ, Enzo Ishall and Baba Harare was always going to be a tough contest, and perhaps experience and longevity proved to be the ace up ExQ’s sleeve as he took home the honours. It was a night of double glory for him as his Tseu Tseu offering was voted the Outstanding Album. The trio dominated the airwaves in the past year with their songs Nzenza, Kanjiva and Hat Dzemurara.
Despite losing out on the Outstanding Male Musician award, it was still a good night for Enzo Ishall after his song, Kanjiva, took the Song of the Year award. “It is such a great honour to receive this award which I dedicate to my son and I would like to thank friends, family, and my fans as well as my producers for supporting me,” Enzo Ishall told NewsDay Life & Style yesterday.
Babongile Sikhonjwa, a Bulawayo radio personality, who doubles up as a stand-up comedian, scooped the Outstanding Radio Journalist award. It was double joy for trending local movie, Cook Off, as it won Thomas Brickhill and Tendaishe Chitima the Outstanding Screen Production — Full Length Film and Outstanding Actress awards. Under the Special Awards category, the late legendary author, Charles Mungoshi, was posthumously honoured with the Lifetime Achievement Award, which was received by his wife Jesse Mungoshi and their children. The Standard newspaper was honoured with the Arts Service Award. Other winners were Danai J Gurira
(Artiste in the Diaspora), Unplugged (Outstanding Promoter) Mai Patai (Viewers’ Choice Award) and Mokoomba (Arts Personality Award). The Viewer’s Choice Award, which went to Gweru-based gospel singer Respina Patai, torched a storm on social media after many felt that she was not a
deserving candidate. Popularly known as Mai Patai, the musician dominated the airwaves a decade ago with the track, Mazambara, before disappearing from the radar. She only resurfaced recently with the album, Punish the Devil, but she is yet to regain her former glory. Comedian, Long John, was over the moon after scooping the Outstanding Comedian Award. He posted on his Facebook wall the same night: “Ladies and gentlemen,
I’m in shock, I’ve never won anything in my life, but today I am so happy to announce that I’ve just Won the Outstanding Comedian Award. This is so unreal I even have a certificate and everything thank you so much everyone for your support #VillageBoy.” Guests were entertained by various live individual performers and groups who included Enzo Ishall, Obert Chari and other dance groups from Bulawayo.
Award Winners Spoken word Outstanding Poet Likhwa Ncube Outstanding Comedian Learnmore “Long John” Mwanyenyeka Literary arts Outstanding First Creative Published Book Gather the Children by Batsirai Chigama Outstanding Children’s Book The City Girl by Elisha July and Tendai K. Rudanda Outstanding Fiction Mazai Emheni by Daniel Mutendi Theatre awards Outstanding Actor Teddy Mangawa in Ukama Outstanding Actress Qeqeshiwe Mtambo in The Hostel Outstanding Theatrical Production Ukama by Savanna Trust Outstanding Director Lloyd Nyikadzino for Zandezi Dance Outstanding Female Dancer Vein N Alfazema in Black Sheep Outstanding Male Dancer Martin Chabuka in 100% Afro Outstanding Dance Group Real Flex Dance Group directed by Martin Chabuka Outstanding Choreographer Macintosh Jerahuni and Chaleen Chimara – Iwe Neni Tinebasa Visual arts Outstanding 2 Dimensional Work The Demolition by John Kotze Outstanding 3 Dimensional Work Zvirimudombo by Shelton Mubayi Outstanding Mix Media Work The Watchman and the Fence I by Greg Shaw Outstanding Exhibition The Grotesque by Alan Sibanda and Talent Kapadza Film and television Eddie Sandifolo as Clive in Bhachi Outstanding Actress Tendaishe Chitima as Anesu in Cook Off Outstanding Music Video Dzamutsana produced by Vusa Hlatshayo ft. Jah Prayzah Outstanding Screen Production (Television Series) Kuchina The Genesis directed by Blessing Gatsi Outstanding Screen Production – Short Film Bhachi directed by Shupai Kamunyaru Outstanding Screen Production – Full Length Film Cook Off directed by Thomas Brickhill Media Outstanding Journalist – Print Fred Zindi – The Standard Outstanding Journalist – Television Patience Nyagato – ZTV Outstanding Journalist – Radio Babongile Sikhonjwa – Sky Metro FM Outstanding Online Media Capitalk Music Outstanding Female Musician Janet Manyowa – Winner Outstanding Male Musician Enoch “ExQ” Munhenga Outstanding Album Tseu Tseu by ExQ Outstanding Song Kanjiva by Stephen “Enzo Ishal” Mamhere Special awards Artiste in the Diaspora Danai J. Gurira Outstanding Promoter Unplugged Viewers’ Choice Award Mai Patai Arts Personality Award Mokoomba Arts Service Award The Standard Newspaper Lifetime Achievement Award Charles Mungoshi