BY GERALD MUTSVAIRO Caps United coach Lloyd Chitembwe says he is not taking Bulawayo Chiefs lightly when the Green Machine host the league’s basement side in a Castle Lager Premier Soccer league match in Harare on Sunday. Chiefs are yet to pick up a point in the league so far and more worryingly they are yet to score either after conceding seven in their first three matches.
But those numbers don’t mean much for Chitembwe, whose side’s defence is yet to be breached. The championship-winning coach said he sees the Chiefs’ match as potential banana skin considering that the Bulawayo side will be desperate to improve on their woeful start. Chitembwe has been conditioning his players to adopt the right attitude for every match. “It’s a new game and the whole idea is to try to play so that we get all three points. It is very important to have the right attitude for this match,” he said
yesterday. “It appears Bulawayo Chiefs are struggling, but I am sure that they have just been unlucky not to get results in the matches they have played. We are  sure that they are going to give us a good game and we are looking forward to the match. We have the right kind of motivation and confidence going in this game.” Bulawayo Chiefs got a 5-0 hiding from Chapungu before they lost two home matches to Chapungu and ZPC Kariba. Caps United, meanwhile, beat Manica Diamonds and Black Rhinos, and drew against Highlanders in Bulawayo. Although Chitembwe is not looking too much into the past, he believes his side will prevail and continue on their good run. “I’m sure with Caps we are going to take our points.” Chitembwe is pleased with the way his team has performed so far. “I am pleased with the side and we are going to give them a difficult game, no injuries so far, the preparations are going great” he said. He will be calling upon his arsenal to perform to their optimum. Pre-season arrivals Phineas Bamusi and Gabriel Nyoni have been doing well so far and Chitembwe will be demanding more of the same come Sunday.