BY FORTUNE MBELE CHICKEN INN defender Last Sithole might not be available for selection for the Gamecocks second Castle Lager Premier Soccer League tie away to Yadah after South African side Highlands Park requested for more time to assess the player. Sithole left the country on March 20 for Johannesburg and was expected back last week, but Chicken Inn secretary Tavengwa Hara yesterday said the Owen Da Gama-coached outfit requested for an extension of time to further look at the player. The defender is expected back in the country tomorrow. “Highlands Park have not said much at the moment, save to say they are requesting for further assessment of Sithole. They requested for another seven days and we will only have feedback on what they have to say about the player after that. We are expecting him (Sithole) on Thursday,” Hara said. Sithole (28) joined Chicken Inn from Bulawayo Chiefs last year. Reports from South Africa indicate that the Lions of the North are planning to release a number of players ahead of the 2019/2020 Absa Premier Soccer League season and if Sithole impresses Da Gama he could be joining compatriots Tapuwa Kapini and former Warriors striker Tendai Ndoro if the two survive the axe. Ndoro joined Highlands Park on a one-year contract in September last year after spending some time on the sidelines. Over the years, Chicken Inn have exported a number of players to South Africa, including Ndoro (Mpumalanga Black Aces) as well as the Warriors’ trio Danny Phiri, Devine Lunga (Lamontville Golden Arrows) and Teenage Hadebe (Kaizer Chiefs). They also sold Michelle Katsvairo and Edmore Chirambadare to Kaizer Chiefs and their latest export to South Africa was goalkeeper Elvis Chipezeze, who is at Baroka FC. Katsvairo is at Free State Stars, while Chirambadare is at National First Division side Maccabi FC and could be on his way to Zimbabwean champions FC Platinum in mid-season. The Gamecocks also exported Warriors’ midfielder Tafadzwa Kutinyu to Singida United in Tanzania, but he now turns out for Azam FC with fellow countryman Bruce Kangwa.