BY FORTUNE MBELE TELONE . . . . (1) 1
DYNAMOS . . . .(0) 1 A TEN-MAN Dynamos had to come back from behind to force a share of the spoils with newboys TelOne in a Castle Lager Premier Soccer League match played at Barbourfields Stadium yesterday. A single point was all new coach Tonderai Ndiraya could gift the Dynamos fans in his first match in charge after the sacking of Lloyd Chigowe last
week. The Dynamos fans at the Mpilo End were content with the draw after the match, saluting Ndiraya and the players, with the team having experienced three successive defeats to Chicken Inn, Hwange and Herentals before yesterday’s match. The first half was a mediocre affair, where TelOne opened the account three minutes before the break, in what looked like an own goal by Dynamos defender Munyaradzi Mawadza. Referee Mhaka Magare gave the goal to Blessing Sibanda who seemed to have only finished off the ball after it had already crossed the line. Dynamos finished the match a man down after skipper Godfrey Mukambi was shown the red card in the 65th minute for a second bookable offence. Mukambi had head-butted TelOne striker Tafadzwa Sibanda during a scuffle. DeMbare had equalised nine minutes earlier through a well-taken free-kick by Vincent Mbega, which beat goalkeeper Tanyaradzwa Huni all systems out. Mukambi’s sending off did not go down well with Ndiraya, who said indiscipline would not be accepted at a time when the team needs to rise from the ashes. He, however, said the point was a confidence-booster going forward. “It was a very difficult game. We played a team that has been together for a very long time. We were largely on the back-foot. We had our opportunities, but due to inexperience from our players, we fluffed those chances,” Ndiraya said. “We improved in the second half, but indiscipline affected us and we had our player dismissed. But at the end of the day, I am quite pleased to snatch a point. It’s a confidence-booster going to the next game.” TelOne coach Jairos Tapera was disappointed with the draw. “I am disappointed that we lost two points, but I am happy with the team’s performance. The ball retention is excellent,” the WiFi Boys gaffer said. Dynamos were denied what looked like a penalty in the 17th minute when Jarrison Selemani was brought down inside the box, but Magare ignored the call. Congolese Ngandu Mangala had some brilliant moments in the first half, but his efforts could not be converted to goals. Sibanda could have scored for TelOne in the 11th minute, but he shot wide with Dynamos goalkeeper Simbarashe Chinani a beaten man. TEAMS TelOne: T Huni, S Phiri, F Bushiri, M Chigumira (M Moyo 88′), I Zambezi, J Jam, E Zinyama, D Mangesi (J Muzokomba 75’), E Mandiranga, T Sibanda, B Sibanda (F Muza 75’) Dynamos: S Chinani, E Jalai, M Mawadza, T Muringai, J Tigere (K Dhemere 57’), T Chisi, G Mukambi, V Mbega, J Selemani (A Maliselo 75’), N Mangala, T Macheke (V Tadzoka 82’)