BY TERRY MADYAUTA CHAPUNGU . . . . . . . . . . . . (0) HARARE CITY . . . . . . . . . .  (1) HARARE City resurgence continued when they handed the previously unbeaten Chapungu their first defeat of the season at Mandava Stadium yesterday. The Sunshine Boys, who came from a goal down to beat Highlanders 3-1 last week, scored their only goal of the season from a penalty spot in the 48th minute,
converted by former Ngezi Platinum Stars midfielder Walter Mukanga after striker Martin Vengesai had been hacked down by Chapungu goalkeeper Talbert Shumba. It was brave for Mukanga to take responsibility for the penalty, having missed his last take in the match against Highlanders. Chapungu had what looked like a genuine goal disallowed, Allen Tavarwisa adjudged to have committed a foul on Marshal Machazane in the build-up. Chapungu coach Rodwell Dlakama, whose side opened their campaign with a 5-0 win against Bulawayo Chiefs before a draw with Black Rhinos last week, was dejected with his first loss of the season. “I thought we had a good game, but losing is not an easy thing. We pick a number of positives from this game. I also thought we scored a genuine goal, but it’s already too late,” Dlakama said. “The penalty was a turning point for the team, but we do not need to lament because like I said there are a number of positives we are picking from this encounter,” he said. His counterpart Mark Harrison heaped praise on his charges for a brave show. “It was a battle and I expected it because when we played against Chapungu the last time, they were very physical and they are uncompromising. But I have to appreciate the boys for a job well done; they really did well today. It was totally different game today. Last week Highlanders were playing good football, but today it was the total opposite of the spectrum. We stood up and got the result we wanted,” Harrison said. “Grinding a 1-0 result away from home is what we need. In fact the boys had a championship performance today,” Harrison said. After a half in which both sides contrived to miss the chances created, City were menacing in attack, after the introduction of youngsters Tellmore Pio and
Denzel Chimwemwe, who brought a lot of energy to their side. Shumba had a moment of brilliance when he palmed a powerful strike from Kuda Musharu back into play before acrobatically gathering the second attempt on the rebound from Tatenda Tumba. Chapungu had a chance to score, but Brighton Mugoni, who has already scored three goals this season, missed a sitter from inside the box on 19 minutes after he was set up by Ian Nyoni. At the other end, Munyaradzi Diro Nyenye blazed over following a neat interchange of passes involving Mukanga and Tumba. As half-time loomed, the Sunshine boys managed to see off a late surge from the home side with Machazane clearing Ian Nyoni’s effort on the line with goalkeeper Kelvin Shangiwa beaten. Teams: Chapungu: T Shumba, E Chitauro (M Mahunga, 83’), H Mugoniwa, C Kwaramba, B Mbavarira, E Muzanenhamo, I Nyoni, G Mleya (P Khumbula, 55’), A Tavarwisa, B Mugoni, N Hunga. Harare City: K Shangiwa, M Machazane, G Madhake, M Nyenye Diro, L Muyambo, M Ncube, W Mukanga (T Pio, 75’), T Tavengwa, K Musharu, M Vengesai (D Chimwemwe, 80’) T Tumba (W Manondo, 85’)