KNOWLEDGE Musona endured a nightmare debut for his new club Sporting Lokeren after a 4-1 thrashing away to AS Eupen in the Belgian Super League, who remain firmly in relegation trouble. BY HENRY MHARA The Warriors captain joined the basement side last week on loan from fellow league side Anderlecht for the remainder of the season, as he looks to resurrect his faltering club career. However, he had a difficult start to life in his new environment as his side were thrashed by the Claude Makelele-coached side. Musona played the whole match, the only second time he has finished a game this season. Lokeren anchor the log-standings with 14 points from 22 games, and are in real danger of getting relegated at the end of the season. Musona decided to leave Anderlecht, a side he joined at the start of the season, as he had been reduced to a bit part player, having failed to replicate the blistering form he enjoyed during his stay at previous club KV Oostende. He struggled to nail down a first team jersey under former boss Vanhaezebrouck, who was sacked earlier this month, and he was hoping for a change of fortunes under new coach Fred Rutten. But it appears Rutten was also not convinced by the former Kaizer Chiefs and Hoffeinheim man, who he decided to ship out so that he gets game time elsewhere. Earlier reports had linked Musona with a move back to KV Oostende, but it seems Lokeren tabled a better offer for the Smiling Assassin. So frustrated was Musona with lack of playing opportunities at his parent club that he turned to popular televangelist TB Joshua a fortnight ago, seeking divine intervention over his faltering career, blamed on a nagging knee injury. While Musona would naturally be disappointed by losing a match on his debut, he would be happy that this team affords him an opportunity to play regularly. His involvement in matches is also good news to Warriors coach Sunday Chidzambga and the team’s fans, who want their star man to get the much-needed game time at club level to gain match fitness ahead of Zimbabwe’s Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon)’s decisive qualifier against Congo Brazzaville in March. He has been the team’s talisman in the campaign, where the Warriors require at least a point in the home match in Harare to book a ticket to the Afcon finals set for Egypt in June. At Anderlecht, Musona only made eight appearances in 21 league matches, of which three were starts, scoring just once.