SCORES of Chimurenga fans in Guruve were left seething with anger after the United States-based music legend Thomas “Mukanya” Mapfumo failed to turn up for what had been touted as his final farewell gig in his rural home on Sunday. BY SIMBARASHE SITHOLE/DEMETRIA MANYONGA Show promoter, Magret Mutongerwa, had told NewsDay Life & Style last week that Mukanya would stage the show after his return from Oliver Mtukudzi’s funeral in Madziwa. But Mukanya’s failure to turn up at the show did not sit well with fans after it had been extensively advertised. Irate fans told NewsDay Life & Style on Sunday night that it was unprofessional for Mukanya to treat his fans in that manner. “With the recent fuel price hikes, surely how can Mukanya abandon us in such a manner. We have sacrificed the few dollars that we had on fuel in a bid to have a farewell with our homeboy. It would have been more fun to have him here since it is his rural home. I am really disappointed”, said a fan who identified herself as Hazel Bayisa. The show, whose tickets were going for $10, was also meant to feature Progress Chipfumo. “When we came here, the atmosphere looked as though the legend was on his way from Oliver Mtukudzi’s burial and we called each other, inviting more fans
as we waited anxiously for Mukanya, but after some hours, we were told by the DJ that the show had been cancelled and scheduled for Saturday,” Farai Zimba said. The venue had been refurbished to meet the standards of the ageless Chimurenga icon. A fan identified as Shungu Murendo felt they were robbed by Mukanya and the promoters as they ended up spending the cash they had at the hotel. “We have been robbed by both Mukanya and his promoters. As you can see, we have no choice, but to spend the money we budgeted for him at this hotel; this is really unfair,” lamented Murendo. Mutongerwa confirmed to NewsDay Life & Style yesterday that things did not go according to plan, but assured the Guruve fans that the show would now be held on Saturday. The Murombedzi show, however, went ahead without incident.