Zimbabwe’s top stand-up comedian Carl Joshua Ncube has received a major boost on his tented home project aimed at breaking away from the cycle of being a perennial lodger, with some players in the tourism sector offering him a self-contained caravan as part of the campaign. BY WINSTONE ANTONIO The Victoria Falls-based comedian has declared that this year he would do away with staying on rented premises and instead live in a tent in a bid to raise money to acquire an own home. Ncube claimed to have so far shelled out about $170 000 in rentals. In a Facebook post, Ncube said Victoria Falls Rest Camp and Wild Horizons had added their weight to the ambitious project. “Victoria Falls Rest Camp have decided to partner us to create camping content designed to give the local tourism market an affordable, but exciting accommodation option in the resort town, while Wild Horizons has offered a shell of one of their tour buses that we hope to convert into a one- bedroomed caravan with a bathroom, kitchen, toilet; all of which we intend to build for ourselves,” he said. “The point of this project is to tell a story of where to start when attempting to own your own space and home as opposed to the image of renting we are so often pressured to do. With this project, all we want to do is show a trait of literally disrupting spaces from scratch and using my social media following and influence to change the discourse on housing and accommodation from a tourism perspective,” he said. Ncube said he was currently marketing his glamping (Glamorous Camping) concept called Camp Feel Good, which offers tented accommodation with some comforts of a hotel room for the budget traveller. He described the Camp Feel Good concept as a glamorous camping trend that is popular around the world. “The Camp Feel Good project also seeks to provide the domestic tourist with an affordable but exciting way to enjoy the resort that has often been described as being out of reach to the domestic market,” he said. The award-winning Ncube has, over the years, established himself as one of the biggest stand-up comedians not only in the country, but also across the continent.