BY FORTUNE MBELE HWANGE could join Mushowani Stars in the Castle Lager Premier Soccer League departure lounge if they lose their penultimate league tie against TelOne at Ascot Stadium tomorrow. Mushowani have since dropped out of the top tier as winning their last two matches will not take them out of the relegation zone. The odds are against the coalminers when they take on TelOne having failed to register victory from their last 18 matches. Their last win came against Chicken Inn at the Colliery back in July. They have since sacked coach Nation Dube, replacing him with goalkeepers’ coach Edmore “MaMkhwebu” Sibanda to try and save the team from the chop with only three games to go. Chipangano are on 33 points from 32 games and need a miracle to survive relegation. Against TelOne they face a side that has been enjoying good form. TelOne enhanced their chances of another dance in the top league with three wins, a draw and one defeat in their last five games in which on-fire King Nadolo was on target taking his tally to 10 goals since joining the Gweru-based club in mid-season. The WiFi Boys, on 39 points, need a win tomorrow against Hwange and their stay in the country’s elite league is secured before they finish off the campaign with Chicken Inn at Luveve Stadium. Yadah, on 35 points, also have tall order and need nothing short of victory against Triangle at Rufaro Stadium this afternoon as they look to stay above the water. They sit on position 16 below Harare City who have 37 points. After Triangle today, their last game is against Mushowani Stars at Trojan Mine Stadium in Bindura on Saturday. The Sunshine City Boys are on the relegation cut-off point and have a tough one against Dynamos at Rufaro Stadium tomorrow and it’s also a must-win for coach Lloyd Chitwembwe before he wraps up the season with another tough encounter against Ngezi Platinum Stars back at Rufaro on Saturday. Bulawayo Chiefs, a point above Harare City, are not safe as well as they have to account for city neighbours Highlanders at Barbourfields tomorrow with Bosso eyeing a top four finish. Herentals are also on 38 points and face title-chasing Chicken Inn at the National Sports Stadium tomorrow while Chapungu, neck-on-neck on 39 points with neighbours TelOne, are away to Manica Diamonds at Vengere Stadium before their last match at Ascot against Highlanders. Fixtures
Today: Yadah v Triangle (Rufaro)
Tomorrow: Highlanders v Bulawayo Chiefs (Barbourfields), Manica Diamonds v Chapungu (Vengere), Ngezi Platinum Stars v Caps United (Baobab), Herentals v Chicken Inn (National Sports Stadium), TelOne v Hwange (Ascot), ZPC Kariba v Mushowani Stars (Nyamhunga), FC Platinum v Black Rhinos (Mandava), Dynamos v Harare City (Rufaro).