BY HENRY MHARA IN MHONDORO NGEZI NGEZI PLATINUM . . . (1) 3
CAPS UNITED . . . . . . . (0) 2
CAPS United produced perhaps their worst performance of the season in a defeat against Ngezi Platinum Stars at the Baobab Stadium yesterday, a result that can cost them the league title. They started off the match at the top of the table and were supposed to win to ensure they needed just a point against FC Platinum to clinch the title on Saturday, but they left themselves with an uphill task as they now require an outright win to wrest the title from the clutches of the platinum miners. It is FC Platinum, now on top of the log with 59 points — one better than Caps, who will take the title with a draw at the weekend. Yesterday’s change of leadership is typical of what the season has been all about, with teams taking turns at the apex of the table. Caps needed to put up their best performance at such a crucial stage of the campaign, but they were calamitous and the scoreline will flatter them. If truth be told, Ngezi could have scored six, seven or eight. Ngezi Platinum controlled the bulk of the game, while United only came to life in the last 10 minutes. Qadr Amini scored a goal in either half, tapping in on both occasions after the Caps United defence had been split open. A Marlon Mushonga shot took a huge deflection off United defender Spencer Masunda for Ngezi’s third as they threatened to tear apart their opponents. The hosts created a glut of chances, which they took turns to spurn, with Donald Teguru and James Ngulube both missing from one-on-one situations with United goalkeeper Mateyaunga. Substitute Dominic Chungwa then squeezed in a cracker to pull one back for United with a few minutes remaining before Newman Sianchali accrobatically volleyed a second at the death as the visitors threatened a dramatic comeback. But it proved too little too late as Ngezi held on, putting a huge dent on their opponents’ chances of winning the title. Caps United coach Darlington Dodo was not happy with his players’ performance. “We did not manage pressure very well. The way we played, the way we presented ourselves, especially in the first half. We did not do as we planned. We were losing the ball unnecessarily,” he said. “Injuries, especially in our defence, are giving us sleepless nights.” Dodo was without centreback Justice Jangano in this match due to an injury, while his partner Lincoln Zvasiya and rightback Valentine Musarurwa were both substituted after picking injuries. Dodo said the injuries were “very bad”, and the three were all major doubts for the title decider. The Green Machine gaffer is confident the players will manage the pressure. “We will manage it. I will have time with the boys, discuss and talk about it. I know we will do the right thing come Saturday,” he said. Ngezi Platinum coach Rodwell Dhlakama was satisfied with the victory. “We needed this victory. We said before that we are not Father Christmas and will not donate points. We want to finish in a respectable position,” he said.
Teams
Ngezi Platinum Stars: N Chadya, K Bulaji, G Takwara, M Kwinjo, F Makarati, P Moyo, W Makuva, M Mushonga, Q Amini (M Miniru, 66’), J Ngulube, D Teguru (M Mlilo, 75’)
Caps United: T Mateyaunga, V Musarurwa (Sarupinda, 63’), J Jangano, S Masunda, L Zvasiya (G Goriyati, 53’), V Ndaba, D Mukandi, J Ngodzo, P Bamusi (D Chungwa, 67’), R Chitiyo, N Sianchali, J Zhuwawu