BY FORTUNE MBELE BULAWAYO Chiefs coach Thulani Sibanda is ready to leave the club if he finds a better offer after masterminding a great escape for the top-flight league side who looked doomed to drop to Division One for the greater part of the season. Sibanda has been linked with a move to either Highlanders or Bulawayo City, who are bouncing back to the Premier Soccer League (PSL) with Chiefs also said to be unwilling to let go of the tactician. Highlanders coach Hendrikus Pieter de Jongh’s four-month contract expires at the end of this  month. Sibanda said he is ready to consider other offers. “A coach is like a chameleon. If it turns green you go green, if it turns red you go red. I am not permanently embroidered at Chiefs.  I might have been at Chiefs for a very long time, but I am not permanently rooted to Chiefs. I am open to any move. If an offer comes, I will definitely look at the options. If it’s a better offer I leave, that is a fact,” Sibanda said. The soon-to-be 41-year-old is one of the youngest coaches in the top division having been exempted to coach in the PSL by Zifa even though he does not hold the requisite Caf A coaching badge. He is a holder of a Caf B badge as well as the Scottish C licence as well as a sports science degree from the University of Science and Technology. He was, however, not registered as coach by Bulawayo Chiefs and his name did not appear in the list of coaches to be voted for in Castle Lager Coach of the Year panel with Farai Tawachera’s name on the list. Tawachera quit Bulawayo Chiefs at the beginning of September. He led Chiefs, then known as Plumtree Chiefs in 2013, to the Southern Region Division One championship having briefly coached disbanded Quelaton in the PSL in 2012. Chiefs, however, sold its Premiership franchise to Bantu Rovers. Sibanda moved to Harare where he coached ZRP FC. In 2016, he was at Chicken Inn assisting Rahman Gumbo, but quit his post after a short stint and returned to Bulawayo Chiefs, where he went on to guide them to promotion into the PSL after winning the Division One title in 2017.