BY WINSTONE ANTONIO JAZZ singer and songwriter Dudu Manhenga will tonight perform alongside prominent Italian jazz pianist Enrico Zanisi at the Musica 2019-2020 festival in Harare. The cultural attaché at the Embassy of Italy in Harare, Massimo Amadeo, said the concert will be streamed live on their Twitter account, ItalyinZimbabwe. “The aim is obviously to make international cultural events accessible to less-obvious layers of the urban population and, therefore, to address the frequent complaint that embassies tend to be a little inward-looking and elitist when it comes to the shows they host,” she said. “Another major upgrade from the past editions of Musica is the audience, with a significant component of schools from high-density areas, for whom dedicated transport has, of course, been arranged, as well as more specifically music-focused students from other institutions in Harare.” Amadeo said they have established a new cultural centre, The Gazebo, to make Italian cultural events more inclusive. “Our ministry in Rome, the Italian community here and our main sponsors all mobilised to make sure Italian culture at its best would still be represented in Harare. Accommodation has also just been built for visiting artistes,” she said. She said they are also committed to promote local artistes. “We thought we should promote not so much Italian music per se or rather, in that specific instance, Italian opera, but rather its interpretation by Zimbabwean artistes, so we provided an audience among the international community in Harare for promising Chitungwiza soprano Molly Dzangare (a member of Harmony Singers),” she said. Amadeo said next year’s edition of Musica in February 2020 will feature pianist Matteo Arevalos, while guitarist Antonio Forcione will be under the spotlight in June, with arrangements currently underway to also bring another prominent Italian ensemble, Banda Ikona. “The mentioned Italian artistes will, in particular, perform for the public on one occasion during their stay, but they will each spend a week or so in Harare, to host workshops at various music schools in town,” she said.