BY SINDISO DUBE HOURS before her grand entry, loyal fans — clad in all white and most of them in body-hugging attire — were seen trooping in numbers like sheep being led to the slaughter, but this one a different slaughter, a guillotine of fun brought by DJ Zinhle. By midnight on Thursday, the Bulawayo Athletics Club (BAC) had turned into a sea of white with party animals that came for DJ Zinhle having heeded the all-white-party theme. The resident wheelspinners did a good job by creating suspense and anxiety for fans to want more of DJ Zinhle. After midnight, the music goddess from across the Limpopo made her grand entrance which caused a stampede as people, mostly women, jostled to have a closer look at the South African entertainer. Looking into DJ Zinhle’s eyes as she played music, one could tell that the South African was happy to be back “home”. Not that she is Zimbabwean but she enjoys being in Zimbabwe, she enjoys the Zimbabwean pay cheque and local fans eat from her palms. “Bulawayo I love you,” she chanted as fans screamed back in ecstasy. However one could not tell any difference between DJ Zinhle’s performance and that of the resident
DJs as the Jozi diva played songs from other musicians throughout her set which lasted for less than 45 minutes. The ultimate Zinhle moment came as she played her yesteryear hit, My Name, which in many cases she plays as an introductory anthem to her live set. Many were brought back to reality that it’s actually a DJ Zinhle show. She then wrapped up her set with the crowd favourite, Umlilo, which literally translates to fire.
Ironically the track lit a fire within BAC as people danced to it in frenzy style. Sweet and very short is best to describe DJ Zinhle’s set. However many among the revellers were left questioning her set as it was too short and she played mostly songs from other musicians. “We only had a feel of the real DJ Zinhle when she started playing My Name and Umlilo. She has a discography which can sustain a set, but she opted otherwise,” said a fan only identified as Terrence.