sport reporter THE Under-19 squad to represent Zimbabwe at the International Cricket Council World Cup next month was announced at the weekend. Dion Myers will captain the side at the 16-team tournament that will be held in South Africa from January 17 to February 9. Wesley Madhevere (pictured) is the vice-captain and he will be playing at his third ICC Under-19 Cricket World Cup event, having made his first appearance at the age of 15 at the 2016 edition in Bangladesh. Zimbabwe’s 15-man squad also includes Milton Shumba who, like Myers, also went to the 2018 tournament in New Zealand. Apart from the experienced trio, another familiar face in the squad is Dane Schadendorf, who was among the non-travelling reserves last time. Coach Prosper Utseya also picked left-arm chinaman (leg-spin) Tadiwanashe Nyangani from Chipadze High School in Bindura, while former national Under-17 football star Taurayi Tugwete also made the cut. Brandon James, the son of former Zimbabwe international cricketer Wayne James, is in the side too. The final squad was selected following a rigorous programme that included trials, several training camps, two tours to South Africa and practice matches against Uganda and local provincial sides. Zimbabwe will face Bangladesh, Pakistan and Scotland in Group C of the ICC Under-19 Cricket World Cup 2020. Utseya’s charges will open their campaign at the tournament against Bangladesh at the JB Marks Oval in Potchefstroom on January 18. They will then take on Pakistan and Scotland on January 22 and 25, respectively at the Witrand Oval also in Potchefstroom. The top two teams from each of the four groups at the tournament will advance to the Super League, while the remaining teams will feature in the Plate championship. Zimbabwe squad for ICC Under-19 Cricket World Cup: Dion Myers (captain), Wesley Madhevere (vice-captain), Emmanuel Bawa, Privilege Chesa, Gareth Chirawu, Ahomed Rameez Ebrahim, Dylan Grant, Brandon James, Tadiwanashe Marumani, Tadiwanashe Nyangani, Luke Oldknow, Samuel Ruwisi, Dane Schadendorf, Milton Shumba, Taurayi Tugwete
Non-travelling reserves:
Brighton Chapungu, Nkosilathi Nungu, Rodney Mufudza, Kudakwashe Macheka, Matthew Welch. — Sports reporter / ZC