ZIMBABWEAN beauty model, Tapuwanashe Allin Manyange, shrugged off stiff competition from 22 other contestants to be crowned Miss Lumiere International World 2019 at Forest City in Malaysia over the weekend. BY WINSTONE ANTONIO The model was expected to touch down at the Robert Gabriel Mugabe International Airport yesterday afternoon. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style from South Africa, where she was in transit to Zimbabwe, Manyange said her personality and confidence was the magic that landed her the crown.
“Representing my country and raising the flag high has always been my dream, I am glad I have managed to achieve it,” she said. Manyange encouraged those aspiring to become supermodels to believe in themselves and follow their dreams. “I feel very strongly about models from out of Harare who, in many cases, miss out on available opportunities because of distance and lack of exposure. I would like to encourage these models to use technology to overcome this challenge and network themselves to greater platforms as I did,” she said. Off the ramp, Manyange said she was passionate about entrepreneurship. She is a director at Classy & Elegant with Allin, which sells bridal ware and accessories. She is also the founder of Tapuwanashe Allin Foundation Trust and Miss Ruwa Charity Beauty Pageant.
The beauty with brains said she was currently pursuing her first degree in Media and Communication Studies. She has a colourful modelling resume that includes Ms Africa Continental 2019 (second runner-up), Ms Africa Zimbabwe 2019,  Face of Africa 2019 (second runner-up), Miss Ambassador for Peace Africa (Third runner-up), Best Petite Model 2018 at the Zimbabwe Models Awards, Miss Legacy Zimbabwe 2017, Miss Summer Victoria Falls 2017, Miss Summer Midlands 2014. Manyange, who is originally from Hwange, has done several charity events, having always been passionate about helping society’s less privileged people. Late last year, the beauty queen organised a charity beauty pageant titled Miss Ruwa 2018 to raise funds for the less-privileged members of the Ruwa community and donated blankets and clothing items to Queen of Peace Children’s Home in Gweru.