THE 2019 Castle Lager Premier Soccer League title conundrum could be settled today with Caps United in with a big chance of clinching the main prize if two results go their way this afternoon. BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA Caps will be crowned champions if they win against Ngezi Platinum Stars at the Baobab Stadium, but only if FC Platinum fail to win against Black Rhinos at Mandava. The Green Machine lead the league table on 58 points, two clear of nearest rivals FC Platinum. Chicken Inn, who are in third place are five points off the pace with just two matches left in the campaign. They also still have a mathematical chance of lifting the coveted silverware. But if Caps win, the GameCocks’ hopes that have been diminishing over the last few weeks will finally be extinguished. If FC Platinum take all three points against Rhinos, the puzzle will only be solved by their collision with Caps at the National Sports Stadium and that would be the dream scenario for any neutrals to see two teams fighting head-to-head for the title on the last day of the campaign.
Both Caps and FC Platinum face tough prospects against teams that are free of pressure, but just as hungry for maximum points. A draw for FC Platinum has the potential to spoil things for the Zvishavane-based side if Caps win at Ngezi. But winning at Ngezi? Easier said than done and statistics don’t look favourable for the log leaders going into this fixture. The Harare football giants lost all of their last three encounters to Ngezi Platinum  by a 2-1 scoreline. The last time they tasted victory against Ngezi Platinum was at Rufaro two years ago when they walloped them 3-0 with the reverse fixture at the Baobab ending in a 2-2 stalemate. In 2016, the Green Machine overcame Ngezi 1-0 in Harare, but they could not be separated  in the reverse fixture at the Baobab. They drew one-all. And after losing one match in their last five matches, Caps will be hungrier to wrap up the championship with a victory over Ngezi Platinum. With their playmaker Joel Ngodzo having been crowned the Castle Lager Soccer Star of the Year, it has provided further motivation for coach Darlington Dodo’s men. Ngodzo has been a huge influence in Caps United’s title challenge, contributing 10 goals. He is the club’s joint top goalscorer with John Zhuwawo. There is also another feel good factor at Caps after former player Nyasha Mushekwi bought a state-of-the-art team bus for them. As they make the trip to Mhondoro-Ngezi, there will be a sprightly atmosphere in their dressing room. Dodo is aware that his team has not won a league match at this venue, but he is not worried about the history. “As far as we are concerned, we are looking into the future. That is all history; we are focused on winning the league title and have been preparing for this match as we have always been doing. As you are correctly saying, if we win against Ngezi and FC Platinum fail to win against Black Rhinos we will be champions, so that’s our focus. We are not looking into the past,” Dodo said. The Green Machine could be without injured defender Justice Jangano, who has to pass a late fitness test. Ngezi Platinum, who are on sixth position on the table with 45 points, are targeting a top-four finish which they can secure if they win their remaining two matches of the campaign.
They are also motivated by the fact that their coach Rodwell Dhlakama handed Caps a 4-2  defeat while he was still at Chapungu.