BY KENNETH NYANGANI MANICA DIAMONDS . . . (0)2
CHAPUNGU . . . . . . . . . . . . . .0
MANICA Diamonds striker Stanley Ngala scored a brace for his side to condemn Chapungu closer to the drop zone in a Castle Lager Premier League match played at Vengere Stadium yesterday. Ngala scored the all-important goals in the 58th and 62nd minutes as he propelled his side well clear of any relegation issues ahead of the last round of matches at the weekend. Chapungu now sit one point above the relegation zone ahead of their last match of the campaign against Highlanders at Ascot Stadium. They have lost four of their last five matches in the league and were winless during the period, which results dragged them into the relegation matrix. Manica Diamonds gaffer Johannes Nhumwa praised his players following the win. “My boys played according to instruction, it was a good win for us and I believe their goalkeeper (Talbert Shumba) kept them in the game. Otherwise we could have scored more goals,” he said. Chapungu gaffer Thomas Chinyan’anya said they were looking forward to putting up a big fight against Highlanders. “They created their chances and they scored and we failed. We are now going to the drawing board and rectify our mistakes in the last game. We will continue to fight until the last day of the season,” he said. The free flow of football was hampered by a waterlogged pitch following rains that pounded Rusape before and during the match. The first real chance of the match came in the 12th minute through Last Jesi for the home side, whose free-kick outside the opposition box was comfortably saved by Shumba, in goals for the visitors. Three minutes later, Shumba was to rescue his side again, parrying away veteran player Benjamin Marere’s shot for a corner kick. Chapungu threatened through Ian Nyoni, who skied his effort over the bar with only the shot-stopper Jorum Muchambo to beat. Manica Diamonds started the second half a more determined side, pinning the visitors in their half. Ngala headed home a Partson Jaure cross in the 58th minute, resulting in the home side taking the lead. Four minutes later, Ngala came back to haunt the visitors again with a wonderful volley to beat Shumba.