YESTERDAY marked the end to the annual commemorations of the 16 days of activism against Gender-Based Violence (GBV) that has been running under the theme Orange the World: Generation Equality stands against Rape. BY WINSTONE ANTONIO The theme was aimed at highlighting the urgent need for public discourse on the issue of rape in an effort to provide women and girls safe spaces to report rape, abuse and sexual exploitation free of intimidation and stigma. The concern over the spike in cases of GBV has stirred Dariro Arts founder and veteran filmmaker Moderate Kasvosve to produce a film titled Sinking Ships aimed at raising awareness on the vice GBV. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style yesterday, Kasvosve said through the two-and-a-half hour film he sought to help people to understand the importance of women and girls in society, bringing awareness about GBV, particularly in southern Africa. “As someone motivated on inspirational dramas, films and theatre to effect a positive thinking and mindset to the community, I am shooting Sinking Ships, a film on gender-based violence, particularly against women and girls because of the abuse that they suffer from childhood until even in marriage. This film is bundled with fear, pain and death, the life of a girl child haunts her soul until death,” he said. “This film is a platform to create a peaceful environment for our women. Women and girls are as powerful as ships, but we men and boys, sometimes do not realise it until they are gone. That is when we see their importance.”
Kasvosve said deterioration of moral and Christian values stirred up extreme violence in communities, adding that the film shall clearly demonstrate all forms of violence that are directed at women and girls in all circles of life. “Sinking Ships is a film that shows the abuse that is directed at women and girls in the southern African region, the abuse that women and girls suffer from childhood to aging, abuse that they suffer from the people who are supposed to protect them, abuse that they suffer from people who are supposed to support them, the abuse that they suffer in their land even in a foreign land,” he said.
“Women also suffer violence from fellow women, other women and girls have adopted the culture of abusing other women, this adoption of woman abuse cause extreme violence against them.”
Kasvosve said men and boys should do away with traditional, cultural beliefs or practices that suppress the rights of the girl child.
“Targeting men and boys will help to curb, prevent and stop violence against women and girls. We are putting men and boys to help in identifying problems and also finding solutions to protect women and girls from all forms of violence against our loved ones. If men and boys would love and respect women, they would definitely live in a peaceful and loving environment,” he said. “The film will define all forms of violence that are directed at our women and girls, the production will show that if a woman is abused it does not only affect her alone, it will also affect men and boys, the family, society, nation, socio and economic environment and the world as a whole.”
The film’s executive producer Tangisai Kasere said the film would reflect the reality, the true incidents, events and also the consequences of gender-based violence, therefore giving men and boys a second thought on response to GBV prevention. “Men and boys will come to an understanding that their participation in GBV prevention programmes is of great importance, and will result in zero tolerance to GBV cases,” he said. Kasere said Dariro Arts will go to great lengths in GBV prevention across southern African region to ensure that every girl child and women in the region is safe and protected. Through his Dariro Arts Kasvosve, has been involved in a series of gender violence prevention roadshows in partnership with various organisations such and the Musasa and the United Nations Population Fund across the country.