Government has ordered the relocation of Zanu PF supporters who were barring a Bromley farmer from taking over land he bought several years ago. BY JAIROS SAUNYAMA The farmer, Samson Chauruka, bought Subdivision H of Whiteside from the Lombart family in 2011, but has been failing to access the land as hundreds of Zanu PF supporters were refusing to vacate the land despite attempts by the Messenger of the Court to execute eviction. Last week, a high-powered delegation led by Mashonaland East Provincial Affairs minister Aplonia Munzverengi, Defence and War veterans deputy minister and Zanu PF national political commissar Victor Matemadanda and a provincial Agritex officer, visited the farm, where a meeting was held to endorse Chauruka as the owner of the farm. In a letter dated December 4 addressed to Chauruka and signed by a Lands ministry official, Marius Dzinoreva, Chauruka was certified as the owner, with Munzverengi being advised to facilitate the relocation of the farm invaders. “The ministry instituted an investigation following a dispute between yourself and families who occupied the above-mentioned property. We have since established that the farm was, indeed, purchased by yourself and is privately owned. The Minister of State for Provincial Affairs, Mashonaland East Province, has been accordingly advised to relocate the occupiers,” the letter, gleaned by NewsDay, read. A few months ago, chaos reigned at the farm after the Zanu PF supporters clashed with the messenger of court who sought to evict them. Some, who were evicted, have since taken refuge along the railway line in Bromley while others are still at the farm. “Some ministers were here last week for a meeting and I hope this time, the occupants will leave the farm so that I start production. I have been failing to utilise the farm due to disturbances by the occupants who are being backed by some politicians. However, I am happy that the new dispensation values property rights,” Chauruka said
yesterday.