BIGGER and better things could be in the offing for financially-troubled Premier Soccer League side Bulawayo Chiefs who have attracted the attention of one the country’s biggest hospitality concern, Cresta Hotels. BY FORTUNE MBELE Cresta Hotels motivated Bulawayo Chiefs in their relegation fight this year by providing the players with accommodation for their last two games against Highlanders and Herentals and The Ninjas did not disappoint, beating Highlanders at Barbourfields Stadium and despite losing to Herentals at Luveve in a match that was shrouded in match-fixing intricacies, they went on to survive the chop to have another dance in the top league next year. The hotels’s head of marketing and business development Tersh Mahia Makamanzi attended the club’s player awards at Cresta Churchill in Bulawayo on Wednesday night, and hinted that something was “being crafted”. Chiefs is one club that has attracted many for its banter on social media, especially on Twitter where they have more than 26 000 followers and Makamanzi said she learnt of the club through that platform. “I did not know about Bulawayo Chiefs, but Twitter made me know about them. You should never underestimate the power of Twitter. As we go on to 2020, I think it’s another chance that you have to fight for honours; not only to wish you the very best going forward, but I just want to say that go get that world; I don’t think you will be fighting relegation again next year. We will support you in every way that we possibly can,” Makamanzi said. She spoke glowingly of the match in which Chiefs beat Bulawayo giants Highlanders nine days ago on their way to surviving the chop. “You guys made me relinquish my passion for a very big club because you won my heart. A lot of people ask me; you are supporting Bulawayo Chiefs? The ones that don’t know you I know are not on Twitter that is why they don’t know who you are.” Skipper Kundishora Chakanyuka, Brendon Mpofu, Malvin Mkolo, Shepard Mhlanga, goalkeeper David Bizabani and coach Thulani Sibanda were rewarded with hotel vouchers following the famous Highlanders win. Lucky Ndlela dominated the awards, winning the player of the year, players’ player of the year and midfielder of the season awards to collect, certificates and undisclosed cash amounts. Arthur Musiyiwa won the top goal scorer of the year gong with eight goals and the fans player of the year award.
The chairman’s award went to Kundishora who also got the most disciplined player of year award with Mobonisi Ncube the most promising player, Shaderck Nyahwa most consistent, striker of the year Farau Matare, Malvin Mkolo defender of the year, goalkeeper of the year David Bizabani and Mpofu rookie of the year award.