HARARE giants Dynamos are pleased with their performance this season after their rebuilding exercise and have vowed to beef up with “quality players” and fight for the championship next season. BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA The Glamour Boys had a sluggish start to the season under Lloyd Chigowe before he was replaced by Tonderai Ndiraya who turned around the fortunes of the club. While they have failed to land the top four which they envisaged, with a top five finish now a possibility, the club hierarchy is delighted with the way things have panned out since Ndiraya took over in April. They are now targeting the championship next term. Club chairperson Isiah Mupfurutsa, said they would support their coach to add quality players that would help them win the league title next season. “Remember we embarked on a rebuilding exercise and we started from scratch with a lot of youngsters without experience and I must say we have done exceptionally well under the circumstances,” Mupfurutsa said. “Also consider that we were not just looking at performance but a lot of other aspects to do with inculcating the culture of the club, discipline and youth development. We are happy that all these we have achieved and we have not had turmoil in the club this season. We now have a solid base from which to build our team and we are not going to buy players of lesser quality than we have. We will make sure the coach has brought in the quality he needs. We will give him both moral and financial support,” Mupfurutsa said. The Dynamos boss said if it meant going outside the country’s borders in search for talent, they would do that. “If we could give financial support to former coach Lloyd Chigowe, when he hired foreign players how can we fail to support Ndiraya if he wants to get players from outside the country? What we just want is to bring in quality players. We don’t want to get players that are of less quality. Once we get the players the coach wants then we can say we are ready to be champions again. The players have gained experience of playing in the Premier League, so we now have a solid base from which to build the team for next season,” he said. The Glamour Boys have been hoping to finish in the top four but they suffered a 3-1 defeat to relegation-threatened Harare City at Rufaro on Wednesday to fall four points behind Ngezi Platinum who are in fourth position. There is only one round of matches remaining before the end of the season. Should Dynamos win their last match away to Triangle, they can only finish on 47 points which means that a fifth position is now realistic.