BY WINSTONE ANTONIO ORGANISERS of the DJ Stavo (pictured) and Friends concert yesterday claimed they had run out of the early bird tickets for the potentially explosive show, attributing it to fans endorsement of the gig to be headlined by South African artistes at Wood Sensation Club, located at LongCheng Plaza in Belvedere, Harare this Saturday. The concert is the brainchild of local award-winning wheel spinner, Steven “DJ Stavo” Sanders and will feature both foreign and local acts. One of the concert organisers, Dee Nosh told NewsDay Life & Style that they were pleased that fans heeded their call to purchase advance tickets to dodge unnecessary pressure on the concert day. “The advance release of the early birds tickets was meant to ease pressure on the concert day. We are happy that the early bird tickets that has been selling on the online platform and our partner outlets at US$5 or equivalent to local currency has been sold out,” he said. “We are happy to be achieving our objectives towards hosting a flawless show as we are now selling the next batch of tickets at US$10 and VIP US$20 respectively. We are also putting the final touches in terms of preparations of the much-anticipated concert and our Mzansi guest stars will touch down at the Robert Gabriel Mugabe International airport Saturday morning.”
Meanwhile, in an earlier interview, Wood Sensation Club manager Takudzwa Tendekai said they are not fretting over rogue bouncers who have become a menace at many live shows, promising that tight security will monitor the uninvited rogue bouncers at the show. “In the wake of rogue bouncers who have become a nuisance at most live concerts, we have taken serious measures about security issues and we want to assure music fans and stakeholders that there will be tight security,” he said. “This is a show that will be accessible to so many people, so fans’ safety is our top priority. The fans must not be worried about their safety at the show. We are giving our patrons assurance that we have them all covered the car park is secure, the VIP has its own entrance and the set-up is good for everyone.” The DJ Stavo and Friends concert will be headlined by South African music stars AKA, Distruction Boyz and Naak Musiq alongside local acts Winky D, DJ Stavo, ExQ, Nutty O, Tamy Moyo Dee Nosh, Asaph, Hillzy, Ash Stylez & Nivek, Twitty, Storm and Bryan K as well as Canada-based wheel-spinner TK Smoothe.