BY WINSTONE ANTONIO A coterie of local musicians is set to share the stage with United States-based Jamaican reggae artiste Mr Easy in Pretoria and Cape Town, South Africa as part of commemorations to mark Digital One Entertainment’s 20th anniversary this weekend. The music promotions company was established in 1999 by Pazvakavambwa brothers; Spragga Benjy, Don Carlo and King Luther, and has hosted several music shows including the annual United Kingdom Summer Fiesta. King Luther told NewsDay Life & Style at the weekend that local artistes they have worked with would be part of the celebrations. These included Soul Jah Love, ExQ, Seh Calaz, Takura, UK-based DJ Kivo Santana and King Labash, who will make up the line-up of performers in Cape Town on Saturday while on Sunday, ExQ, Mr Easy, Killer T and DJ Kivo, among others, will take to the stage in Pretoria on Sunday. King Luther said the second leg of the celebrations will be in Zimbabwe at Alex Sports Club on December 21 as part of the Madirirano Festival featuring Soul Jah Love, Seh Calaz, Winky D, Tocky Vibes, Dadza D and Guspy Warrior. “Initially, the plan was to have the Zimbabwe celebrations held at Takashinga Cricket Club in Highfields, where Digital One was born, but we had venue challenges because it was already booked, so we had to shift to Alex Sports Club,” he said. King Luther, who originally hails from Highfields, said they were satisfied with their contribution to the growth of several local artistes. “I have been hosting shows in the UK with my brother, Calvin McKenzie Pazvakavambwa and nephew Boniface Jana. Boniface is actually the first person who discovered Jah Prayzah and he was the first one to bring him to the UK,” he said. During their early years, Digital One Entertainment used to provide sound at most live shows in the UK before fully venturing into music promotion, leading to the setting up of offices in South Africa and Zimbabwe. They have also promoted Tanzanian music star Diamond Platnumz, Nigeria icon Davido and Jamaican reggae dancehall singer Charley Black’s shows in the UK and Zimbabwe.