BY WINSTONE ANTONIO ORGANISERS of the DJ Stavo and Friends concert said they are not fretting over rogue bouncers who have become a menace at many live shows, promising tight security at the December 21 show at Wood Sensation Club, located at LongCheng Plaza in Belvedere, Harare. Music fans have lately become victims of harassment and theft, often losing money and valuables to thieves and thugs masquerading as bouncers and operating in syndicates during live shows. Wood Sensation Club manager Takudzwa Tendekai yesterday told NewsDay Life & Style that there would be tight security to monitor the uninvited rogue bouncers. “In the wake of rogue bouncers who have become a nuisance at most live concerts, we have taken serious measures about security issues and we want to assure music fans and stakeholders that there will be tight security,” he said. “This is a show that will be accessible to so many people, so fans’ safety is our top priority. The fans must not be worried about their safety at the show. We are giving our patrons assurance that we have them all covered and the set-up is great, car park is secure, the VIP has its own entrance and the set-up is good for everyone.” One of the concert organisers, Dee Nosh urged fans to buy tickets in advance to avoid pressure on the day of the show. “People who are willing to attend the DJ Stavo and Friends concert (are encouraged to buy) tickets in advance and not at the gate as this causes unnecessary pressure,” he said. “The early bird tickets for the concert are selling on the online platform clicknpay.africa and at MyCash outlets at US$5 and VIP US$20 or equivalent to local currency.” Dee Nosh said the concert, which will feature both local and foreign acts, is meant to promote local talent so that they go global as well to send a message of oneness in showbiz regardless of different nationalities. The DJ Stavo and Friends concert will be headlined by South African music stars AKA, Distruction Boyz and Naak Musiq alongside local acts Winky D, DJ Stavo, ExQ, Nutty O, Tamy Moyo Dee Nosh, Asaph, Hillzy, Ash Stylez & Nivek, Twitty, Storm and Bryan K as well as Canada-based wheel-spinner TK Smoothe.