BY MTHANDAZO NYONI The re-industrialisation of Bulawayo has returned into the spotlight after local businesspeople formed a trust to revive the once industrial hub of the nation. The Beautiful Bulawayo Trust (BBT) was founded by Darlington Nyika and seeks to co-ordinate and establish a one stop shop that will help revive Bulawayo’s industry and market its rich culture. The one-stop-shop will be anchored on tourism. “Tourism, as one of Zimbabwe’s key economic pillars, will play an integral role as it will constitute the bedrock to the campaign where art, sport and our natural heritage will combine forces to create the platform for economic growth, sending a message of peace, love, purity, power and happiness to the rest of the world,” reads part of the BBT’s concept paper. “The targeting of a single sector should see the triggering of action in all other sectors and downstream activities as we turn the city into ‘the gateway to the jewels of Zimbabwe.”’ The paper notes that many people in the world do not understand how good Bulawayo is and how much it has to offer. “We need to get out there and articulate Bulawayo’s uniqueness in the global context. Bulawayo has so much potential, however, there is need for greater engagement, interpretation, energy and effort to unlock this potential,” it reads. As a first step to lead the process of building, branding and championing the Buy Bulawayo concept, the trust will develop innovative approaches to engage the citizens. “The people of Bulawayo are the most valuable ‘brand asset’ as well as potentially its strongest brand ambassadors. The establishment of a destination marketing unit for Bulawayo will help to develop integrated communication strategies and international marketing campaigns to clearly communicate and promote the assets and uniqueness of Bulawayo,” the paper further reads. The trust will ensure Bulawayo becomes the location of choice for tourists and top global talent. To achieve some of these things, the trust will be hosting economic, investment conferences and exhibitions as it targets specific capital for specific sectors and entities classified under specific umbrella groups, bodies and sectors.