BY CHARLES LAITON THE Harare City Council could find itself forking out $460 800 as compensation to former business ventures manager, Gadzamoyo Dewa after the latter sought to register an arbitral award granted in his favour by the Labour Court. According to the court papers, Dewa was fired from Harare City Council over a decade ago following his unearthing of massive corruption in the EasiPark joint venture deal, which he alleged benefited council’s top brass at the expense of ratepayers. In March last year, Dewa filed a $1,5 million litigation against his former paymasters seeking compensation for his unlawful dismissal and ill-treatment by the top council officials, but the matter was never finalised. Dewa said he worked for the City of Harare as an administrative assistant responsible for health services prior to being promoted to business ventures manager, a position he held until he resigned at the end of 2008. The former manager further said he was re-engaged by the council to represent its interest in its joint venture with EasiPark in February 2011, but after some time the City of Harare’s top brass allegedly subjected him to painful working conditions, which he alleged was meant to make him a sacrificial lamb, while plundering the council’s resources. Dewa said he was eventually dismissed from employment in December 2011 after which he then approached the Labour Court and was granted an order which he has now taken to the High Court for registration. “Applicant (Dewa) contested against the unfair dismissal in the Labour Court and an order was issued affirming the arbitrator’s arbitral award remains in force. Applicant, therefore, now approaches this honourable court seeking to have order granted by the Labour Court registered with this court,” Dewa said in his declaration. “The arbitral award sounds money and provides for a monthly salary of $7 200. That money should be paid from the date of suspension and deprivation to date. I have 64 months of deprivation and a total sum of $460 800 which should be paid within seven days. “I should also receive my benefits that include, use of personal issue twin cab vehicle or equivalent, I must be restored any outstanding fuel of 20 480 litres being 80 litres per week for the 256 weeks. In addition I should get my laptop, phone, medical aid, funeral benefit and this should be paid with effect from December 12, 2011.” In his application Dewa also said sometime in December last year EasiPark, now called City Parking, sought confirmation of a draft ruling order, but the application was dismissed by the High Court, which then ruled that the arbitral award granted by the Labour Court remains untampered with and in force.