BY FORTUNE MBELE HIGHLANDERS will be loaning out goalkeeper Nedrick Madeya after securing the services of former Bantu Rovers and Bulawayo City’s Wellington Muuya and ex-Mutare City Rovers’ Alfred Chiname. Madeya enjoyed a lot of game time in 2017, under coach Erol Akbay, who had dropped veteran shot stopper Ariel Sibanda. Coach Madinda Ndlovu retains his trust in Sibanda, who is in his 10th year in the Highlanders’ senior team. Ndlovu also gave Madeya an opportunity and he featured in some games last year. Club chief executive officer Nhlanhla Dube yesterday said there are some clubs that have expressed interest in Madeya, who was promoted to the senior team from Division One side Bosso 90 in 2017. “We said that with the new squad, some players will have to make room for new players. We cannot have more than three goalkeepers in the senior team. Madeya is being sent out to get game time. A few teams have expressed interest in his services and soon we will know his destination,” Dube said. Madeya was part of the 17 players that went on strike last week, abandoning a training camp in Matopos demanding a share of last season’s league proceeds, Chibuku Super Cup and the Kembo Mohadi Charity Shield prize monies as well as camp allowances. The players pulled out of camp on Tuesday last week only to return on Thursday after a meeting with the club’s executive. They broke camp over the weekend and travelled back to Matopos yesterday morning and they are due to change venue during the week. “They are going back to Matopos. They will move later in the week because they have to have a full training schedule in Matopos after last week’s disturbances,” Dube said. New players that are part of the squad in camp include returning striker Prince Dube, Nqobizitha Masuku, Zambian national Peter Nyirenda and former Aces Youth Academy forward Russell Chifura, while injured Bukhosi Sibanda is not training. Adrian Silla, Peter Muduhwa, Brian Banda, Denzel Khumalo, Ben Musaka, MacClive Phiri, Tendai Ndlovu, Vincent Moyo, Mbongeni Ndlovu and Tinashe Makanda are among those in camp.