BY FORTUNE MBELE BULAWAYO mayor Solomon Mguni on Thursday attended Bulawayo City, FC’s training session at St Columba’s High School and pledged the local authority’s continued support for the team with hopes of a quick return to the Premier Soccer League (PSL). The club was relegated from top league last year after narrowly surviving in 2017. Mguni, who is the patron of the club, attended the training session after he was invited by councillor Siboniso Khumalo and club chairperson Jerry Sibanda. He said the team’s drive is to concentrate on junior policy as the municipality has a responsibility to empower the youth through sport and provide entertainment to its residents. “The old and new players are shaping up and we are assured of competitive and entertaining football as the Division One municipality side fight for a quick return to the Premier Soccer League. As part of our community social responsibility, the City of Bulawayo will continue to support the club. The club executive committee’s focus going forward is on junior policy,” Mguni said. “To that end, the club will be partnering with schools and social clubs to nurture and harness our young, talented children from within the city of Bulawayo. Bulawayo City FC should be a community  sports development and empowerment initiative. It is the city’s mandate through the Department of Housing and Community Services, to empower its youths through sports as well as to entertain its residents.” Bulawayo City have lost coach Bekithemba “Super” Ndlovu to Highlanders. Ndlovu has been roped in as one of the assistant coaches to Madinda Ndlovu. In the Division One campaign, where Bulawayo City will face stiff challenge from ZPC Hwange and Talen Vision, Try Ncube, who was one of the assistants, will take charge, assisted by Johannes Ngodzo and Golding Dube and goalkeepers’ coach Julius Ndlovu. They have lost Sipho Ndlovu to Chicken Inn, goalkeepers Wellington Muuya and Munyaradzi Diya to Highlanders and Dynamos, respectively and also Toto Banda and Timothy January.