By Sindiso Dube Nomadic former Warriors forward, Roderick Mutuma is enjoying a new lease of life at his new base at FC Lupopo in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The self-proclaimed Prince joined the Congolese side in December, after a stint with the now-defunct Nichrut. Mutuma had a descent outing for the mining club, who he joined mid-season after a dry spell in Division One. The Congolese move is the  30-year-old’s second stint outside the country, having previously played for Bloemfontein Celtic in the South African top-flight. The in-form Mutuma has scored three goals in two appearances against Bazano and FC Nyuki and has set a target of a minimum of 10 goals from the remaining 13 games in the second half of the season. “I arrived on January 8 during the mid-season break. We have played two games now and I have managed to score three goals. I have found form and I am enjoying life here and I think I am in a good space in life. I look forward to score at least 10 goals in the remaining games. Ten is a good number, considering that I joined the season half way,” he said. Mutuma said he has worked hard to match the Congolese physical type of play. “Football here is different from home (Zimbabwe), the game is more physical and for one to make it into the team, you have to be very fit. I have worked so hard to get where I am now and I look forward to work harder and continue to improve. I am having a good time here and my only challenge is the language barrier because here they speak mostly in French and Lingala,” he said. The forward described his recent stint with Chegutu Pirates as a test from God that he managed to pass. “When I joined Chegutu Pirates, I think it was a test from God and if I had let that moment get into me I was going to quit doing what I love doing, which is playing football. Everyone had written me off and said I will not play top-flight football again and Pirates was affected by financial constraints. My salary, bonuses and housing allowances were not being paid well so I then opted to leave and train alone for half of the year until I joined Nichrut.”