BY WINSTONE ANTONIO AWARD-WINNING South African pop star-turned-pastor and gospel singer, Martin Phike, will add sparkle when he joins a stellar line-up of performers at this year’s fourth edition of the two-day One Voice Inter-Denominational Concert set for October 25 to 26 at Harare Gardens. Minister Martin PK, a member and partner of Loveworld Nation under the pastoral care of Pastor Chris Oyakhilome, will also share the stage with South Africa-based Zimbabwean gospel singer Takesure Zama, among others. The Mzansi singer has already confirmed his availability at the concert in a video which is doing rounds on different social media platforms, adding he was looking forward to return to
Zimbabwe. “God bless you everybody, this is Martin PK, Superman, Mr Holly Spirit. I am excited to be part of the One Voice Concert Season 4 taking place in Zimbabwe at the Harare Gardens on
the 26th of October. This, indeed, is going to be the gathering of the champions. I will be with Spirit Praise. It’s going to be an awesome time, with the presence of God,” he says in the video. “I have been looking forward to my return to Zimbabwe and what a time to come for the Once Voice Concert. So I will see you on the 26th of October. Tell everybody that the Superman
is coming to town. It’s going to be a powerful time of prophesy, a powerful time of worship, a powerful time of visions and it’s going to be a change of season for someone. So get
ready, I am looking forward to see you there.” The concert, likely to attract hundreds of gospel music lovers, will be held under the theme Gathering of Champions.
In an interview with NewsDay Life &Style yesterday, the concert director-cum-Spirit Praise Choir director Learnmore Tawengwa said each and every edition gets better and better, with
this year event spreading for two days. “We are privileged to be having a multi-talented instrument of God who ministers through song, dance and word, Martin PK, as one of our guest ministers for this year’s One Voice Concert
4,” he said. “Unlike the previous editions, this year’s event is going to be a two-day music fiesta, a gathering of the champions, also featuring over 10 choirs drawn from different churches.”
Tawengwa said the main thrust of the concert is to promote unity among different churches. “As God is one, the One Voice Concert is meant to demonstrate as well as promote unity among Christians, hence the stellar line-up of inter-denominational choirs that will participate at the event,” he said. “The concert gives a platform to praise and worship teams from different churches as they rarely get the opportunity outside church to showcase their talents.”