BY PRECIOUS CHIDA THE Prophet Emmanuel and Ruth Makandiwa Invitational Concert and Awards Night (PERMICAN), last held in 2016, have bounced back and will be held on November 29 this year. Running under the theme Creatively Touching Souls, the awards will be held at the City Sports Stadium. Speaking at a Press conference, PERMICAN director, Ted Lazaro, said the awards were put on hold for the past two years due to the depressing economic situation, which made it
difficult for them to secure sponsorship. “Things have been difficult in Zimbabwe for some time now and because of this, it was difficult for us to get the support from corporates that used to sponsor us, but I am happy to
say we have managed to get a number of them on board for us to have these awards this year,” he said. He called on interested musicians to submit their music released between June 2018 and July 2019 for consideration before October 4. Lazaro said this year’s awards will come with a cash prize and a number of artistes from other countries are expected to grace the awards night. “Unlike the previous years, all the awards from this year will come with a cash prize, but we cannot disclose the amount yet because of the changes that have happened to our currency
and we are also going to have a strong worship line-up as we are bringing in big artistes from other countries, whom we will announce as soon as we seal the deals,” he said. Awards up for grabs are in a number of categories that include Song of the Year, Video of the Year, Best Group and Best Female Artiste. Two new categories — Best Church Choir and Best
Diaspora Artiste — have also been added to the list. The last edition of the awards held in 2016 saw Janet Manyowa (pictured) walking away with three gongs. Other popular musicians that walked away with awards in the previous ceremony include Joyce Simeti, Charles and Olivia Charamba, Charles Chipanga, Pastor G, Mathias Mhere, Mudiwa
Mtandwa, Machanic Manyeruke, Prince Mafukidze, Minister Michael Mahendere and Josh Kays.