DYNAMOS coach Tonderai Ndiraya says the two-week league break gave his team time to regenerate and expects them to be firing from all cylinders when their Castle Lager Premier Soccer League campaign resumes with a tricky clash against Chapungu at Rufaro Stadium tomorrow. BY HENRY MHARA The Harare giants picked just one point from their last two matches before the break, in a period where key players were affected by injuries. Veteran striker and skipper Edward Sadomba and all their four foreign imports were struggling with injuries.
Ndiraya said they had used the break to improve the players’ fitness. “The break came at the right time; it has really given us time to push our boys and work on a number of things. We were initially mourning about the boys’ fitness so it gave us time to work on them and get to the level that we want them to get to. It gave us time to work on the technical and tactical side of the game. It has given us some rest and time to really refocus. We lost our last match (before the break) away to Highlanders and we have been working on the mentality of the team to make sure that they forget about that and refocus and continue with the journey we are in,” Ndiraya said. “But most importantly, it (break) also gave us time to run around and look for players and we are in the process of finalising some of the deals,” he added. Former midfielder Archford Gutu has re-joined the club, while Simba Nhivi could soon complete his return to the Harare giants. Gutu is unlikely to feature tomorrow, as he had not received his reverse international clearance. Ndiraya said there were two more “experienced players” who could be joining next week. “Normally, when you shop around during the mid-season window, you are looking for players who will make an immediate impact, and I think the experienced ones will come and add some quality in the team and perhaps help take off pressure from the youngsters.” DeMbare’s new found resolve will be put to test when bogey side Chapungu arrives in the capital tomorrow for a clash, which has a 2pm kick-off. Their last meeting in Harare ended in a drab goalless draw. “They (Chapungu) have been difficult customer for us for some time now, particularly when they come to Rufaro Stadium, but I’m hoping that this time around, with the preparations that we have had, we will be able to get the  points. They are a good team and they have been together for some time, both in football and at work, so they have that unity and they understand and fight for each other.” Chapungu are also buzzing going into the match, with the arrival of former Caps United striker Brian Muzondiwa lifting spirits in the team. Coach Rodwell Dhlakama believes the capture of the striker will help ease their goalscoring woes. The outspoken gaffer has warned Dynamos to expect a tough test. “Playing Dynamos comes with a lot of motivation. Whether they are losing or not, they present an interesting test for us. We are gunning for maximum points, just like any other team would do. The points will not come on a silver platter, because we have to work hard to get them. It’s also high time we end the narrative that Chapungu always lose to Dynamos. We need to win this game, if we are to improve on our position
or if we are to maintain it,” Dhlakama said.