BY SHARON SIBINDI IMBUBE groups in Matabeleland will on August 17 hold their fourth imbube expo, Rise Up Chothoza Mfana, running under the theme United We Stand, Divided We Fall — Simunye Chothoza, which is aimed at marketing the genre in the country at Bulawayo Theatre. Nine imbube groups will stage their performances as organisers of the event seek to popularise the genre. “As artistes in Bulawayo, we are tired of music from outside Zimbabwe. Due to lack of support from our own people, some of the imbube artistes from Bulawayo left the country for greener pastures in South Africa, while some even left the music industry,” Oscar Siziba, chairman of Rise Up Chothoza Mfana, said. He said the expos had helped bring appreciation of imbube groups, with the genre now becoming popular. “We have seen so much change as an association (Rise Up Chothoza Mfana) because this has brought people together, and we are now having big followers,” he said. “We are seeing multitudes of people attending our shows, which we had never experienced before. People should expect new productions from the groups and other new groups that will engage with us on the day. “We are not doing music alone, but we can now easily help individuals in the stable if they are in a critical situation. If any member faces a serious problem, we are there to help financially.” Siziba said the genre was the face of the city, adding that they did not only promote themselves, but upcoming artistes who are into that type of music. “Imbube is the face of Bulawayo, so our vision is to teach the young ones more about our own culture. We promote our own upcoming groups, down to the grassroots. We are proud of our own music,” he said. “We are expecting people from Victoria Falls, Harare and South Africa to attend this expo.” Rise Up Chothoza Mfana is made up of Black Umfolosi, Men of Influence, Great Star Ijongisi, Indosakusa The Morning Star, Ukukhanya Kwezwe, Sunduza, UMthombo weZizwe, IButho likaKristu and Amaqhawe ENkosi.