26 June 2019: Standard Chartered Bank today announced the official launch of its digital bank in Zimbabwe, making another pioneering innovation by the Bank in the market. The launch of digitally-led bank follows launches in Uganda, Tanzania, Ghana and Kenya in the first quarter of the year and Côte d’Ivoire in 2018. Standard Chartered’s digital bank comes with world-class digital capabilities, bringing greater convenience to clients enabling them to live their lives and passions whilst banking on the go. With the bank digitising 70 of the most common service requests including blocking and ordering a debit card, adding/removing a signatory, requesting a visa support letter or opening an additional account, local and international funds transfer ,all without the need to visit a branch. Commenting on the launch, Lovemore Manatsa, Standard Chartered Bank Chairman, said: “We are very excited to launch the digital bank in Zimbabwe. This is a key milestone in our digital journey as a Bank and underlines our commitment to investing and growing in the market. We have been steadily investing in and expanding our digital footprint in Zimbabwe – this will continue to be a priority moving forward. Digitising banking in the country in line with global trends remains at the heart of our business strategy.” By digitising the entire banking experience, Standard Chartered is offering secure banking services via mobile devices to meet rapidly changing client needs at the right scale. Clients will continue to enjoy exclusive benefits from an increased number of alliances and partnerships spanning travel, shopping and dining. Speaking at the launch event, Head of Retail Banking, Valeta Mthimkhulu said, “Our digital bank was developed with our clients in mind. We have taken into consideration their feedback at each stage of the design process, and have incorporated innovative technology to allow them to execute all banking activities from a mobile phone via the Standard Chartered Bank App – SC Mobile Zimbabwe.” Valeta said she was delighted to see the progress that Zimbabwe has made over the past decade as far as digital banking is concerned. “We have seen how digital transformation has contributed to economic development and will continue to do so, in line with the country’s National ICT plan.” Standard Chartered used the launch to unveil its Digital Banking Influencer – EXQ – who has partnered with the Bank to boost awareness of the new digital bank, and help to spread the word about how convenient, accessible and rewarding it is for clients to bank anywhere, anytime. The digital bank is available by downloading the Standard Chartered mobile app – SC Mobile Zimbabwe – for free via both Google Play Store and the Apple Store For more information or interview opportunities, please contact: Lillian Hapanyengwi
Head Corporate Affairs, Brand & Marketing
Standard Chartered Bank, Zimbabwe
+ 263 772176435 / Lillian.Hapanyengwi@sc.com Standard Chartered
We are a leading international banking group, with a presence in more than 60 of the world’s most dynamic markets. Our purpose is to drive commerce and prosperity through our unique diversity, and our heritage and values are expressed in our brand promise, Here for good. Standard Chartered PLC is listed on the London and Hong Kong Stock Exchanges as well as the Bombay and National Stock Exchanges in India. For more stories and expert opinions please visit Insights at sc.com. Follow Standard Chartered on Twitter, LinkedIn and Facebook