A MIXTURE of regional artists entertained hordes of fans based in South Africa to celebrate the life of the late Father Zimbabwe, Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo, through arts at the Berea Charles Gorchel Park (Mtshangani Park) in Johannesburg on Sunday. BY SHARON SIBINDI IN JOHANNESBURG The annual Dr Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo Celebration, now in its seventh edition, that was held as part of festivities to mark the 20th anniversary of his death, featured Zimbabweans, South Africans, Nigerians and other nationalities was organised by South Africa-based Matabeleland Entertainment News. A blend of both upcoming and yesteryear artists, among them Mehlokazulu, Thabo Arts, Zinjaziyamluma, Dubia Masters,Mahlalela, poet Bongani Ncube and Nkazimulo Afro Melodies who performed at the show that was ran under the theme I Am Because You Are brought Bearea Park to life with energetic performances for eight hours, managing to keep the audience on its toes. Victory Siyanqoba director Desire Moyoxide stole the show with a poignant poem titled Mene, Mene, Tekel Parsin, while Madlela Sikhobokhobo also sent the fans into delirium. Also not to be outdone was Freddy Gwala with a top-notch performance. In the midst of his performance, Gwala promised fans to watch out for his forthcoming album. Among the concert sponsors was Kingdom Blue Funerals Service, which provides Zimbabweans based in South Africa with funeral insurance. The sponsors awarded Victoria Falls poet Obert Dube a director’s choice award worth R5 000.
Dube said he was ecstatic that his works were being recognised internationally. “Glory to God first, and I thank Kingdom Blue Services for having faith in my poetry. Winning an award where great poets performed means my poetry is still appreciated. It gives me the energy to do more. The award will open more doors for me,” he said. Mongezi Mpofu, the organiser, said he was happy that the annual event is now popular among Zimbabweans based in South Africa. “Hundreds of Zimbabweans based in South Africa gathered and celebrated the day with us. Some local business people and companies are now supporting this movement,” he said. Among the people who graced the event were Mehluli Moyo from the Joshua Nkomo Cultural Movement, Kingdom Blue Service chief executive Brilliant Ncube, former Zipra commander Andrew Nyathi, businessman cum-Pastor Acts Aota and Nichole Ngwenya of the Joshua Nkomo Youth Movement.