London — According to Le Soir, Aston Villa have had a €10 million bid for Marvelous Nakamba rejected by Club Brugge. But, it seems that rejection hasn’t gone down well with the player, as he believes that the club has disrespected him by not accepting the offer. As a result, the Zimbabwean didn’t show up at training and is reportedly trying to force a move away from Brugge this summer, with Villa and 1.FC Cologne both
interested in his services. Nakamba initially moved to Club Brugge in a €3 million move from Vitesse back in 2017. He played a prominent role in the first-team during his debut campaign
in Belgium, featuring in 26 league games. The holding midfielder impressed the onlookers with his consistent performances and instantly became one of the best players in the Belgian top-flight. However, the Zimbabwean international endured a frustrating spell at Brugge last season. It is believed that his relationship with coach Ivan Leko strained since the start of this calendar year. This resulted in his omission from the first-team during the back-end of the 2018/19 campaign. In fact, Nakamba managed only 15 league appearances last season despite not facing any injury problems. What can he bring to the table? A defensive midfielder by trade, Nakamba can offer energy and tenacity in midfield. He loves to win back possession for his team, and quite disciplined as
well. The 25-year-old, despite his 1,77m frame, is a physically astute midfielder, who often comes out on top in physical 1v1 duels. He is also a strong tackler and a good reader of the ball — making him a well-rounded number six. Should Aston Villa make another offer for Nakamba? Nakamba is someone Aston Villa should consider signing this summer. The Villans are yet to add any significant reinforcements in the midfield department this
summer. And the Brugge star, to that end, would be a massive coup for Dean Smith. As discussed earlier, the 25-year-old is an energetic midfielder and his combative qualities in the middle of the park should tune in well with the physically
demanding nature of the Premier League. He can offer protection to the Villa backline and should provide some much-needed competition to the likes of John McGinn and Conor Hourihane. Besides, it’s unlikely that the newly promoted Premier League outfit will have to fork out more than €15 million for Nakamba.
With the player also keen on leaving Brugge, Aston Villa should consider making another offer to sign Nakamba this summer. DailyStar