BY HENRY MHARA Charles Manyuchi’s dream of reclaiming the World Boxing Council (WBC) silver welterweight title could be realised soon, with the boxing star scheduled to fight Frenchman Nordine Arik on September 28 at the Harare International Conference Centre in a World Boxing Federation (WBF) title fight. The winner of the fight automatically becomes the number one challenger for the WBC silver welterweight title and Manyuchi has set sights in winning the fight in front of the home crowd. The 29-year-old is yet to taste defeat at home in his professional career, stopping all his opponents before the final round. Initially, he had been pencilled to fight Ayoub Nefz, but the Charles Manyuchi Boxing Academy, who are promoting the fight, yesterday announced the change of the opponent. “I’m ready to fight Nordine for the WBF title and I am going to make it because I want to go back where I was before. I want to be the WBC silver welterweight titleholder and I have been given another chance so I will make full use of it. I am working hard to achieve that,” Manyuchi said at a Press conference yesterday. But he will have to be at his best against Nordine, who has an impressive career record of 18 wins (six knockouts) in 24 fights with just two defeats and as many draws. “I expect a tough fight and I’m training for all the 12 rounds. Like I said, I’m ready to fight and win. Manyuchi has come under criticism for his fighting style, which many believe was the reason why he lost the WBC title in the first place. Attempting some “drunken master” tricks, Manyuchi was caught with a sharp jab by Qudratillo Abduqaxorov for a technical knockout defeat in the first round of the title fight. When asked if he is going to change his approach, he said: “My style will never change, whether I get criticised or not, but that’s who I am. I’m a drunken master and that’s how I fight. I’m a professional boxer and I have used that unconventional way before and won, so I’m going to win again.” The fight headlines an exciting bill which will also see the undefeated Hassam Milanzi putting his blameless record against Pompero Nkoma of Malawi in a 10-round WBF elimination title match. Bout card 1 Charles Manyuchi v Nordine Arik (France) 2 Hassan Milanzi v Pompero Nkoma (Malawi) 3 Kudakwashe Chiwandire v Euria Matora (Malawi) 4 Evans Husavihwevhu v Andile Ncube 5 Brandon Dines v Takudzwa Kuchocha 6 Tinashe Majoni v Anywhere Katunga 7 Enock Musambudzi v Tinashe Zihove 8 Vincent Muziri v Ian Limbana 9 Tatenda Biningu v Ian Kacheka