BY LIFE & STYLE REPORTER TELONE has expanded its DEOD platform by adding 12 new channels to the existing 15 as it seeks to expand its offering to the Zimbabwean market. A total of 12 news, entertainment and inspiration-themed channels are now available on the service for free to customers, with eight new entertainment channels added to the Pay TV section. The free channels include Al Jazeera, Africa News, TRT World, Russia Today, France 24, Deutche Welle, GOD TV, HopeChannel, SBN, Inspiration TV, KayaTV and RT
documentaries. These are in addition to the local Zimbabwean Zollywood collection of films added to TelOne’s DEOD platform in April this year. TelOne managing director Chipo Mtasa said they were delighted to continue bringing quality television viewing options in partnership with Discover Digital. “The recent addition of the Zollywood catalogue will not only bring a true Zimbabwe flair to the platform, but will give customers more freedom on viewing
options. The launch of the Free-to-air channels also give the DEOD service the edge in the home entertainment industry,” she said. She said the development was part of TelOne’s wider strategy through its technical partner, Discover Digital, to avail quality content to a large audience
through a mix of low-cost video-on-demand subscription packages and free-to-the-consumer or advertising-funded content. Discover Digital international director Stephen Watson said they were delighted that their channel partners had embraced the new approach. “The addition of such a mix of local and international content, as well as the inclusion of free TV channels, will give viewers a lot more choice and
flexibility as far as their digital entertainment-on-demand is concerned,” Watson said. DEOD offers a mix of entertainment on a-pay-per-title-rental basis, from all six major studios in Hollywood, a large selection of subscription content
including series, movies, documentaries and music videos, offering both free-to-air and Pay TV linear channels. The Pay-TV channels include BBC Worldwide, Bloomberg, Euronews, Fightbox, Motorvision, Nautical, Ginx, Vox Africa, Docubox, Filmbox, Filmbox Arthouse, 360 Tune
Box, Gametoons, Fast as well as Fun Box and Fashionbox. TelOne and Discover Digital launched DEOD in October last year and the services have since exceeded their customers’ expectations.