ONE of the golden discoveries of the urban grooves movement in the early 2000s, Daniel “Decibel” Mazhindu (pictured), has released a new single featuring Jamaica’s Action Fire, which he said marked his comeback onto the music scene. BY FREEMAN MAKOPA Crowned King of Zimbabwean Urban Grooves at one point, Decibel hit the limelight after his single, Nakai, topped radio charts for a straight two weeks after release. The Shurugwi-born musician, who left the country at the peak of his music career in 2005, told NewsDay Life & Style that he believed it was his moral duty as a musician to speak for the underdogs. “Well, it’s something I’ve always thought is important. If you are in a privileged position, where your voice can be heard, then it is your moral responsibility to speak out on behalf of those whose voices may not be heard,” he said. “The message is, do not ignore social injustice just because it’s not happening to you.” He said the new single — Voice of the Voiceless — has marked his return to the music ring in earnest. “I have done a few singles since I left Zimbabwe, but I have not aggressively marketed them, perhaps due to a subconscious lack of motivation. Personal circumstances saw my priorities shift more towards family time. Voice of the Voiceless will mark my return to the music arena, and I am happy to say that I am back with a bang,” he said.
Although described as an urban-groover, Decibel said he had never classified music as he was experimental in approach. “I just go with the flow. I like all types of music, from classical to death metal and everything in between. I would not limit myself by picking one. Expect anything and everything,” he said. Decibel graduated from the University of Zimbabwe in 2002 with a degree in biochemistry before studying sound engineering. His second single, Chido, surpassed Nakai after some time. These songs occupied positions  two and five on the year 2002’s Top 100. The video for Chido also stayed on number one on the charts for more than six weeks. The singer released his first album, What Kind of World, in 2004 and it became the best-selling album under the Country Boy Records stable. The album carried the controversial Madhara, whose video also topped the charts for more than eight weeks. In 2007, Madhara was banned from all ZBC channels because of its lyrical content which was deemed inappropriate.