BY TERRY MADYAUTA UNDER-FIRE TelOne technical manager Joel Luphahla has been given a one-match ultimatum to save his job, and will be fired if the team lose to Hwange on Sunday. The former Warriors winger had what appeared a promising 2019 season start, but things have turned woeful in recent times for the financially stable outfit. TelOne are on an eight match winless run, results that have seen them plunging down into the relegation zone, where they are seated second from the bottom. Luphahla has been allowed to call shots at the Gweru-based side as a reward for leading the team to promotion while head coach Jairos Tapera has been playing
an advisory role. Reports indicate that Tapera will take the reins should the team fail to win at the Colliery and will appoint a new backroom staff. TelOne FC president Lloyd Mthetwa was rather reserved in his comments, but stressed the need for an urgent improvement of results. “Very soon we will be doing a results assessment because we really need to work out a plan that will get us winning. We can’t be mourning for the large part of the season. If we keep losing, then there will be an urgent need to change those stirring the ship and perhaps bring on board those with new ideas,” Mthetwa
said. “So for now, we can’t assure the safety of anyone’s job because what we need are results more than anything else,” Mthethwa said. TelOne’s campaign has been quite painful so far having gone for eight games with one win, four draws and four defeats. Their latest defeat came at the hands of Mushowani who are also struggling. The WiFi boys are languishing in the relegation zone, occupying 17th position with a paltry 13 points and are just two points above log table anchors Bulawayo
Chiefs who have 11 points on their tally. In their bid to improve their fortunes, the club has signed former Highlanders winger King Nadolo. “We have signed King Nadolo and we hope he will add more fire power to the squad, especially in the current situation where we need to win at all costs,”
Mthetwa said. Nadolo is TelOne’s latest mid-season acquisition after Guide Goddard, Ishmael Wadi and David Temwanjira.