BY TAFADZWA KACHIKO TOP model Pauline Marere has been selected Miss Heritage Zimbabwe and will represent the country at the Miss Heritage Global set for Accra International Conference Centre in Ghana on August 20. Marere and 50 other models from across the globe have a date in Accra from August 10 to 21. Founder and vice-president of Miss Heritage Global, Ronald Tisauke, confirmed Marere’s nomination which came after a call for entries extended to countries
without Miss Heritage national directors in April this year. “We had an open online application system for countries without national directors, among them Zimbabwe. We received many entries and of the candidates that applied in April, she was the best. She is experienced and expressed a better understanding of ethos of the pageant,” he said. Marere told NewsDay Life & Style that she was humbled by her selection and promised to lift the country’s flag high. “I feel humbled and honoured because representing Zimbabwe is a task I always do with pride and joy. I always make the best out of it. It’s a huge
responsibility, but with hard work and dedication, I will definitely make it. I have already started preparing for the pageant, and I am working hard to ensure
that I bring the crown home,” she said. “Miss Heritage search was done in April this year, where the was a call for auditions and submission of portfolios to models worldwide. A couple of girls
applied here in Zimbabwe, then a few weeks later I was contacted and told I had met the requirements and would represent Zimbabwe.” The event, set to be hosted in partnership with Ghana Tourism Authority as part of the festivities for the country’s year of return campaign, will be televised
live on DStv’s channel Africa Magic and artistes Runtown, Busiswa, Okyeame Kwame, Vanessa Mdee, Ebuka and Joselyn Dumas will provide entertainment to
audiences. The model was crowned World Miss University Emissary at the 28th edition of the pageant held in Cambodia in 2017 and queen at the Miss Africa Continent pageant
in Soweto, South Africa, last year. Marere has participated in, and won, several pageants, including Miss Cape Peninsula University Bellville Campus 2017-2018, where she was crowned the Queen of
the Cape 2017-2018, Face of Glitz and Glam 2017-2018 (Queen), Miss Cape Diva 2018 (Queen), Miss Glitz and Glam 2017-2018 (Queen), Miss Universities South
Africa 2017-2018 (People’s Choice) and Miss Tourism Mashonaland West 2018 (Queen).