HEART and Soul Broadcasting Services booked the launch of Infinix Mobility Zimbabwe at The Venue in Harare which saw the interaction of Heart and Soul presenters with the tech savvy features and user friendly interface of the new S3 and S4 smartphones.
 
The event was officially launched by Borrowdale councillor and acting Harare mayor, Ian Makonde. Those in attendance included Infinix distributors, retailers, bloggers and Infinix Zimbabwe’s core team of Russell Chipendo, Ben Matenga, and Lovemore Chirobe.
 
Heart and Soul broadcasting said Infinix was designed for young people and is devoted to improving technology.
 
“With the brand spirit of challenging the norms, Infinix smart devices are designed specifically for young people who want to stand out, reach out and in sync with the world,” they said in a statement yesterday.
 
“Infinix is committed to building cutting-edge technology and fashionably designed dynamic mobile devices to create globally-focused intelligent life experiences through a merging of fashion and technology.”  
 
They said the Infinix S4 and Smart 3 Plus are cutting edge devices equipped with all-functionality as it is powered by a 2.2GHz octa-core MediaTek Helio P22 processor and comes with 3GB of RAM and is powered by a 4,000mAh battery.
 
They added that Infinix is affordable despite its commendable features.
 
“Powered by the Media Rek Helio A22 processor, the Infinix Smart 3 Plus is one of the most affordable phones to offer triple rear cameras, pairing it with an appealing design and an all-day battery life. It has premium-looking aesthetics and features a 6.21-inch HD+ (720×1520 pixels) display. It is powered by the MediaTek Helio A22 processor paired with 2GB of RAM,” they said.
 
Infinix falls under Transisson Holdings, a mobile phone manufacturer based in Shenzhen, China, TECNO and Itel which have penetrated the African market.
 
Poised to be a series contender in the highly competitive smartphone market, Infinix aims to meet the curiosity and needs of intelligent digital technology lifestyles. Infinix currently promotes product line in Europe, Africa, Latin America, the Middle East, and Asia.