LILONGWE, MALAWI – An initiative supported by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and involving the Ministry of Health and the Malawi Prison Service to screen female inmates, prison staff and spouses of prison staff for cervical cancer reached 446 women. By Moses Magadza The women were from 17 prisons which accommodate female inmates. Of all the women screened, 197 were inmates. The screening was conducted by the Ministry of Health certified staff using Visual Inspection of cervix with acetic acid (VIA).  A report compiled after the screening shows that 11 women were VIA positive and were treated on the spot. Four women presented with other gynaecological problems and were treated at Prison clinics while two others had lesions which needed specialist attention at the Central Hospitals, hence were referred for further management. The screening had been planned to reach 1000 women within the Malawi’s correctional facilities. However, most female officers or spouses of officers did not turn up due to a myth around the screening. Some of the targeted women reported that they already underwent the procedure, while others were not eligible at the time due to normal biological processes. This was more common amongst female inmates. Be that as it may, the cancer screening initiative demonstrated that it is feasible to reach the underserved population such as inmates with health services and rights that are equal to the general community as stipulated within the Rule 24 of the United Nations Minimum Rules for the treatment of prisoners. Inmates that were screened appreciated the service while cervical cancer district coordinators were very supportive. The report has recommended that more awareness among targeted beneficiaries to debunk myths and increase uptake of services be undertaken. It also recommends proper coordination amongst ministries and partners for successful initiatives. International standards that include the Nelson Mandela Rules support the provision of the same standards of health care available in community and health care services to prisoners free of charge and without discrimination. Similarly, the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules) encourage screening of all female prisoners for reproductive health related issues. In 2003 the General Assembly of the United Nations called for increased attention to be devoted to the issue of women in prison, including the children of women in prison, with a view to identifying the key problems and ways in which they could be addressed. -Moses Magadza is Communications Officer for UNODC Regional Office for Southern Africa.