OFTENTIMES, followers or stakeholders are disturbed and uncomfortable when their team leader remains silent while there’s a burning issue. People gather around a voice that speaks to silence their doubts and fears, thereby establishing their hopes. They pursue a voice that solidifies their life pursuits, aspirations and dreams. Subscribers to a vision need a voice that splits open the Red Sea, so to speak. When they face uncertainty, they expect a voice that gives clarity and direction. They clamour to a voice of warmth, security and confidence. A voice that stills storms and inspires enthusiasm to face the next level of life is their cry. Followers have high regard for a voice that opens highways in thistle-thickets and soothing rivers of sweet waters in deserts. A voice that fills some emptiness, whose echo resonates with their maker’s unstirred gifts and talents fits perfectly into the untapped reservoirs of their calling. Silence kills potential and destiny. While they understand the dictum, action speaks louder than words, they know divine wisdom created heaven and earth by words. Silence would have buried uncharted realities. Silence won’t open a new world of endless possibilities. Their loaded capacities remain a pipe dream. They won’t be able to bequeath to the next generation a better world. While this piece is on the grace of God, a good example is national politics and governance. Silence on key national issues results in impatience and agitation. Citizens want to hear solutions towards ending the queuing for fuel that has now become the norm. A leading voice has to speak on bread shortages. They expect an authoritative voice to speak on unaffordable transport fares and the state of electricity. The list is endless. National cohesion and buy-ins to national agenda are compromised when participants are starved for information. The nation needs to move on. We have been stagnant for quite too long, or rather have been retracing our steps to the starting point. Let’s turn now to the meat of the Gospel of Christ, the grace of God, the Good News of Jesus Christ or the Glad Tidings of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, of which I’m a minister. God has spoken or in simpler terms, God spoke. Christianity came into being because silence was broken. How fulfilling, comforting, reviving and reassuring to hear the voice of your maker, captain and Father. Religions were silent and the world was hopeless. The eternal silence has been broken. We have a revelation. That God has spoken unto men is the hallmark of Christianity. Theologians often distinguish between natural religion and revealed. The Bible makes it clear that Jehovah is the only true God, who both hears and speaks. At the conquest on the mountain as recorded in 1 Kings 18, Elijah brings into the fore that his God hears and speaks when fire comes down to consume his offering. Contrary to that, the prophets of Baal had cried all day without an answer. God taunts the human made gods through the mouth of Isaiah the prophet. Isaiah 44:14-17, New King James, record: “14 He cuts down cedars for himself, And takes the cypress and the oak; He secures it for himself among the trees of the forest. He plants a pine, and the rain nourishes it. 15 Then it shall be for a man to burn, For he will take some of it and warm himself; Yes, he kindles it and bakes bread; Indeed he makes a god and worships it; He makes it a carved image, and falls down to it. 16 He burns half of it in the fire; With this half he eats meat; He roasts a roast, and is satisfied. He even warms himself and says, “Ah! I am warm, I have seen the fire.”17 And the rest of it he makes into a god, His carved image. He falls down before it and worships it, Prays to it and says, “Deliver me, for you are my god!” Wherever artefacts such as wristbands, stones and water,  are used, tread carefully. I have written extensively on this subject on this platform, should you require detailed and exhaustive study. God came in person through incarnation by the Man Christ Jesus. Prior to that, he had sent messengers and prophets who spoke on His behalf. The coming of Jesus Christ is the final word God has spoken. Hebrews 1:2 writes: “Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds.” Christianity isn’t chasing the wind of religious and doctrinal error, but the voice of God in His Son.
This should help you see the power of the Word, especially in the New Testament and the purpose the New Testament prophet serves, because God has spoken. We shall unravel all these issues, but I want to leave you praying. Prayer is the echo in man’s spirit of God’s own voice. Men learn to speak to the Father who is in Heaven as children come to utter words by hearing their parent speak. It is the deaf who are also dumb. God speaks first, and prayer answers as well as asks. Men reveal themselves to the God who has also revealed Himself to them. Grace and peace be multiplied to you through knowledge. Feedback: pastor@newgatechapel.org Fellowship with Pastor Makarimayi on Facebook and on www.twitter.com/PEMAKARIMAYI.