BY MUNYARADZI MADZOKERE DYNAMOS coach Tonderai Ndiraya has had to eat humble pie after calling on Evans Katema, a player he off-loaded while coach at Ngezi Platinum Stars three year ago, in a bid to steady the club’s rocking ship. Earlier this week, the Harare giants sensationally snapped up the veteran striker, currently the league’s second best scorer, who is believed to have been under the Chicken Inn radar. Katema’s signing brings the number of Dynamos’ confirmed signings to three, while Godknows Murwira is also set to join the club on loan from FC Platinum. Midfielder Archford Gutu and Simba Nhivi have also been confirmed by the club. But it is Katema’s signing that caught everyone by surprise and Ndiraya had a climb-down on the player at training yesterday. “I worked with him before at Ngezi Platinum Stars when I got there in 2016. In fact, I was the one who off-loaded him and to show you how funny football is, I
am the same coach who has called him to come and assist me here,” Ndiraya told journalists. “But, I think his statistics speak for him. He should be the second top scorer in the Premier League now, with seven goals, and that naturally motivated us (to
sign him). If he can score seven goals for Mushowani, a small team which is in the relegation zone, what more at Dynamos? “But it comes with a lot of challenges also because it’s going to be the first time playing for a big team. I am hoping that the experience he has amassed over
the years and the goals he has scored so far will spur him on and push him to want to do more for Dynamos Football Club.” However, Ndiraya implored the Dynamos family to be patient with Katema, who is 23, and give him time to settle. “But this is a different system at Dynamos, so I implore on the entire system to be patient with him. He may not hit the right code immediately, but he must be
given time to do what he can do. We have seen what he has done at Mushowani, and I believe he can do the same at Dynamos Football Club,” he said. Dynamos have struggled for goals so far this season, only finding the back of the net eight times in 13 matches, the second worst strike force after that of rivals Highlanders, who have only scored seven times. The club has since gone on over drive in search of experienced strikers during the mid-season window, finding  Katema and Nhivi. Gutu is also expected to add the attacking impetus to the team. In his first interview at the club, Katema was excited about the biggest move of his career and has no hard feelings with his new coach. “I know coach Tonde; I believe him calling me means he has seen something in me and I believe that he can make me a better player. This is a massive move for
me to join the biggest club in the country it’s a big challenge so I take it as it comes,” he said. “I know the demands of the team. I just have to do my best, be myself, work very hard, connect with my teammates, enjoy myself and that way I can manage the
pressure of playing for Dynamos.” Katema could make his debut when Dynamos play Black Rhinos tomorrow.