those who have made it in this life are ordinary people with extraordinary dreams and aspirations. Some have been born in poor settings, but they have risen above those challenges to be shining beacons of change, influence, and significance, just like Mother Theresa, Martin Luther King (jnr), Mahatma Gandhi, and Nelson Mandela. These were great dreamers, who wanted to leave a positive mark on this globe. You also can leave a mark. But how? Here are tips from experiential wisdom and reading the biographies of great personalities. Start with a why Simon Sinek wrote a book called Start With a Why. What he articulated was that human beings should master the power of ‘why they do what they do’. You have to think about the ‘why’ and end with your ‘why’. The reverse could be dangerous. Sinek says: “It’s not the work we do that inspires us either. It’s the cause we come to work for.” Find your true happiness True and lasting happiness or fulfilment does not come mainly from material possession, but in fulfilling our purpose. True happiness comes from an ‘aha moment’. Most people are trying to find happiness from wrong activities. True happiness is in your purpose, which leads you to do particular activities. For example, Bill Gates, as one of the richest people on the globe, does not derive joy from money, but from what he does with the money to change the world. Most people start with money in mind.  Most people will do all sorts of destructive things, just to get the dollar. Most people try to find happiness in sex, wine, and food, but they are never satisfied. True happiness starts from knowing your true purpose and essence.

Start living, and stop just existing There is one thing that pumps up juices when you do it. I usually say, find the very thing you can do easily or naturally or without a struggle. That heightens your innovativeness and creativity. The moment you know your ‘why’ of life, you start living (and not just existing). You start living when you walk and work in your lane. Know what you want Successful people have found what they want. If they have not found what they wanted, they create what they want. The moment you know what you want, you start living in your own terms. See more and dream more! If you don’t know what you want, the danger is you will work the rest of your life helping others fulfil their own visions. Sharpen your craft Talent is not enough; you have to work and improve on it. Competence breeds confidence. Sharpen your skill. Ecclesiastes 10:10 says: “If the ax is dull and its edge unsharpened, more strength is needed,     but skill will bring success.” Skill is improved by working on your craft everyday. Avoid naysayers Most people are doing what everyone is doing. We call that peer pressure. People are pressured by their friends and surroundings. You are not what people say you are. You are a unique masterpiece. When you know what you want, you know where to place a demand. When you know what you want in life, you dominate your space. When you know your worth, average people will walk away thinking you are proud. Don’t park Most people have parked their lives. How? They have given up. Some have stopped working towards their true purpose, and are living a lie. Some have been beaten by life and see no reason to shine. Some copy others. Don’t park your dream. Just like a parked BMW, as long as it does not have gasoline it won’t move, even though it has great potential, so are people without passion and vibe. Parting Point: Strive for mastery “Successful people have successful habits” — Jack Canfield et al in Power of Focus. Master your habits.  Have a purpose. Work on your purpose and win. Purpose-driven people drive change. Be the best in your area and make a positive contribution to the world. Don’t ever forget that your daily ritual usually becomes your reality. Jonah Nyoni is an author, success coach and certified leadership/business trainer. He is the author of Inspiration for Success and Success Within Reach.