BY TERRY MADYAUTA DEFENDING Castle Lager Premier Soccer League champions FC Platinum have signed winger Nsila Mawethe from the Democratic Republic of Congo, seen as a direct replacement for Ali Sadiki, who is on his way to Zambian club Kabwe Warriors. The Congolese midfielder joins the club together with three players who were recently promoted from the club’s feeder club, FC Platinum U-19, which plays in the Central Region Soccer League. FC Platinum spokesperson Chido Chizondo confirmed the new acquisition. “We have signed a new winger Nsila Mawethe from the DRC. We have also promoted three players from our juniors, who are joining the senior team. Those that have
been promoted are Higayiso Magaya, Panashe Mutimbanyoka and Keith Madera,” she said. “Those who have been following our U-19 know that these boys have been outstanding and its now their time to come through and find their place in the senior
team.” Chizondo also revealed that Godknows Murwira’s loan move to Dynamos was imminent. “We do not block players if they want to leave the club. Godknows Murwira is on his way out of FC Platinum as well, but we are yet to agree on the loan deals
with Dynamos, though I am sure he will be playing for them until the end of the season,” she said. Meanwhile, the platinum miners welcome back long time absentee Simon Shoko, who spent the last two seasons on the sidelines due to injury. The development comes as FC Platinum are battling to assemble a strong squad to fight at two fronts. Besides their title defence, FC Platinum will also be participating in the Caf Champions League, which starts next month. Coach Norman Mapeza has warned of imminent disaster if the team fails to bolster the squad, which continues to lose key players. Besides Sadiki and Murwira, the team has also lost the inspirational Moyo twins, Kelvin and Elvis, who have completed their move to South African side Chippa
United. The twins were part of the longest serving players at FC Platinum, having spent six years in the Zvishavane camp after joining in 2013. During their long stay at Pure Platinum Play, the pair played a pivotal role in the club’s success story, where they broke the Harare-Bulawayo stranglehold of the local league to clinch two PSL titles in a row. Kelvin also became one of the decorated centre-backs on the local front after being crowned a soccer star of the year first runner-up twice, while also earning
numerous national team call-ups. Chizondo confirmed the duo’s departure, together with that of Sadiki. “As FC Platinum, we are happy to announce the departure of our special twins, Kelvin and Elvis, who are on their way to Chippa United. They have signed the
deals and they will be playing in the ABSA Premiership next season. It is very exciting news for FC Platinum,” she said. “We also have Ali Sadiki, who is on his way to Kabwe Warriors in Zambia. We wish them all the best as they join their new teams.” There have also been reports that the club is struggling to tie down players whose contracts end this month end and at the end of the year. But Chizondo has allayed any fears of a massive exodus at the club. “The team is very solid stable. There has been a lot of speculation that team has become unstable, that players are out of contracts and players are leaving,
which is all misinformation,” she said. “We would want to set that record very clear. With regards to contracts, only one player, thus Ali Sadiki, is out of contract and he is on his way out.”