BY GERALD MUTSVAIRO Caps United will be without defender Method Mwanjale who is ill, while midfielder Blessing Sarupinda, Joel Ngodzo and Kudzai Nyamupfukudza are all suspended, but more worryingly, coach Lloyd Chitembwe was once again absent from training, fuelling speculation about his future at the club. Chitembwe missed Caps United’s last match before the Afica Cup of Nations-induced two week break against TelOne, with the club saying it was due to illness. Yesterday, some officials at the Green Machine training session maintained that Chitembwe would join training later, but he never pitched-up. Reports suggested that Chitembwe was on his way out, but Caps have refuted that suggestion. The Green Machine will be a hugely depleted side, with Gabriel Nyoni also out as he is on trials in South Africa, leaving the technical team with a headache. But technical director Nelson Matongorere, who was in charge of yesterday’s training session, said he was confident of the team doing well against ZPC Kariba at Nyamhunga Stadium on Sunday. “We are training well and are prepared. We started our preparation for this game last Thursday. We were given a two week break and we used eight of the days to rest. We came back to training last week and are ready for ZPC,” he said. “I know people are saying that Caps United have players on suspension. Don’t worry, we will give other players opportunities to prove themselves. We have registered 25 players and each week we only call upon 11 guys to be on duty and seven substitutes on the bench. So, the squad is big enough and things are moving well.  If you look at our squad, they are almost identically the same in terms of their strength and agility . It’s just a matter of plugging out and plugging in new talent.” Following a disappointing draw at home against TelOne, Caps United will be out to win as they pursue log leaders FC Platinum. Matongorere confirmed that Nyoni was still in South Africa and was likely to leave Caps United. “Gabriel is not currently available as he is still on trials with a club in Maritzburg and things are going good for him. If he makes it, it’s something that will be good for us here in Zimbabwe and everyone as it shows that something positive is coming out from the soccer community in Zimbabwe” he said.