“Don’t focus on the things that are hot. We don’t care what other people say. We just know there is a future. When everyone says “yes,” then there is no chance for you. Never wait for everything to be ready,” once observed the executive chairman of Alibaba Group, Jack Ma. What an advice, and what a lesson  for those who are prepared to push forward. Thus be fired up; let nothing stop you, because you are unstoppable. Why? Strength and courage are not always measured in victories and medals that you collect, but by the struggles you overcome. These include struggles with fear and pain, all wrapped around you. Life struggles always come to take you up the faith ladder. The story of the disciples An exciting story is narrated in the synoptic gospels.  The story shows us that nomatter how terrible things maybe, we  need to keep believing. Keep the faith and hold on. Never be shaken. We should never lose heart, even when the chips are down. Just keep your head up. Even if you don’t see the way ahead, keep believing. The disciples  wanted to depart from where they were and go to the other side of the sea.  In this journey, they had to use the ship. This was the common means of transport during ancient times. Unfortunately, along the way, disaster befell them. All of a sudden, there arose a storm. “And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves, but Jesus was asleep. (Matthew 8:24).  In no time, his disciples came to him saying save us, for they thought they were perishing. When danger has come your way, when you don’t see the solution in the middle of pain,  when all hope is gone and you feel like you are drowning in the dungeon of disaster, just remember that when  life door closes, another will always open for you. When life’s pain has severely pressed you down to the extent of drowning all your strength and forces you to surrender, don’t succumb. Be vigilant. Be courageous. Be clothed in your usual stubborn faith. Don’t let yourself to be torn apart, fearing for the future. Take on “the whole shield of faith, wherewith we shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked,” (Ephesians 5:16). Embrace faith and brush aside fear. Be gallant. Be firm and fight on. Don’t be a crybaby. Life is not as dark as you may assume. Horrible times come just to help you see there is something better ahead. They make you a better cadre of battles of life navigation. They strengthen you. They leave you in a better state than you were before. They create in you a tough faith-fabric that can withstand all future-life calamities. Remember…. The Lord is so faithful, he can’t allow you to be tempted beyond what you can bear. In all your temptations, there’s always a way out. There’s a solution. There’s an answer. So, when the disciples focused on the frightening prevailing storms, there were more terrified. They saw themselves perishing. They saw their end before they came to it. But not everything that seems to have the capacity to destroy you, is able to. No. Not at all. It is within you to choose what to focus on. Choose right. Choose wisely. Choose what is best for you. Seeing the glass You can decide to see the glass as half-full or as half-empty. The choice is yours. You choose, but choose that which will give you an upper hand; a real better outcome. Complaining is not best for you. It works negatively on your health. It works negatively on your attitude, belief system or even your self-esteem. So, drop it and bury it in your waste bin. It affects you. Complaining gives no room for progressing. It is a retrogressive tool of destruction. So, why hold onto that which doesn’t help? Get what works and it will work for you. Endure the pain, for pain is only for a season; good times will roll again.  The whole world will always step aside for a man who knows where he is going. As a life hustler, champion and fighter, you must never give up. You must aways aim to move forward.  You must nurture your mind with great thoughts, for you will never go any higher than you think,”(Benjamin Disreal). So, think big. Think boldly. Think like a winner. Think like a champion, because you are. Your thoughts are your seed for greatness. They are your initial capital for success. So, take care of them like they were a newborn baby, for they define your destination.  In these difficult and challenging day, give yourself an even greater challenge than the one you are trying to master and you will develop the powers necessary to overcome the original difficulty (Williams Bennet). It can be done. Don’t give up. Never throw in the towel. It is just the beginning of the good things for you. Be blessed and enjoy. Steve Nyambe is a motivational speaker and a leadership coach. He can be contacted on leadershiptouch@gmail.com.