BY SPORT REPORTER TOP local boxing trainer and manager Clyde Musonda is excited to add a Zimbabwean flavour to the big female World Boxing Council Silver lightweight championship bout pitting Malawian Anisha Basheel against undefeated Briton, Chantelle Cameron set for the Brentwood Centre in Essex, United Kingdom, tonight. The potentially explosive match-up is also the final eliminator for an opportunity to fight unified world champion Katie Taylor of Ireland for four world titles. Taylor currently holds the WBC, WBO, IBF and WBA female lightweight titles, which are major accolades in the boxing fraternity. Musonda, who owns a local boxing academy Deltaforce, is the trainer and co-manager to Basheel, the 21-year-old reigning Africa Boxing Union and Commonwealth champion. “This fight is big to us and the whole of Africa because a WBC Silver title is on the line. It is also a final eliminator contest, which means that the winner will face unified world champion Katie Taylor and an opportunity to win four big titles that she holds,” Musonda told NewsDay Sport from London
yesterday. “As much as it is a defining moment for the boxer, this fight is also good for Zimbabwe because as a trainer, I will be representing my own country. If she wins this bout and goes on to beat Taylor, Zimbabwe will also be recognised for producing top boxing trainers. “I have been training Basheel for five years and she has never lost. She has won all her fights by knockouts and she is going to knockout Cameron,” he added.
Basheel, who also goes by an alias “The Massacre”, is currently on a run of eight consecutive wins, all of them by technical knockout, while Cameron has an equally impressive record of 10 wins in 10 bouts, seven of them in short distance. Should the Malawian win the WBC silver lightweight title and final eliminator, she will become the first African female boxer to have a shot at four titles at once. The young pugilist is also no newcomer to the United Kingdom after the she beat Samantha Smith in 130 seconds for the Commonwealth lightweight gong in London last June.