BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA Dynamos . . . . . .(0) 1 Chapungu . . . . . . . .0 GHANIAN import Robert Sackey rose from the bench to score a stoppage time volley on his debut as Dynamos edged Chapungu in a hard-fought Castle Lager Premier Soccer League tie at Rufaro yesterday. The Ghanaian forward was signed before the start of the campaign, but had not featured for the Glamour Boys due an injury. But when he came on for Tawanda Chisi at the start of the second half, he did not disappoint. Skipper Edward Sadomba was the architect of the goal, pouncing onto a long ball dispatched by goalkeeper Simbarashe Chinani under challenge from the opposition defenders and brilliantly
set up Sackey with a first time pass, who responded with a stunning volley that gave goalkeeper Talbert Shumba no chance. It was a perfect finish from a perfect finisher. The wild celebrations that followed the goal were justified given that Dynamos were outclassed by Chapungu in every aspect of the game except on the score board. Sackey enthused afterwards, promising the Dynamos supporters more goals. “Before I came on, I knew I would score. When the ball was coming to me, I knew I would score,” he said. “I believe in myself and I would want to thank the coach for giving me this opportunity. I also want to thank my colleagues because we work as a team. I hope I will continue to score
more goals for the team.” The visitors started strongly, launching wave after wave of attack on Dynamos and could have gone up after 11 minutes, but Ian Nyoni failed to do justice to a good set-up by Allan
Tavarwisa.
In the 20th minute, Chapungu had a penalty appeal waved away by the referee as they relentlessly attacked the Dynamos goal. The home team also had goalkeeper Chinani to thank when he brilliantly tipped over a free kick by Hillary Mugoniwa after 40 minutes. Dynamos’ biggest chance came a minute later when Sadomba realised that Shumba was offline and tried to chip him, but the veteran goalkeeper rushed back to his area just in time to
tip the effort over. It was the visitors who, however, continued to pile more pressure on the home team. But Sackey killed off the match in the optional time from an exquisite pass by Sadomba. Dynamos coach Tonderai Ndiraya was pleased with the result, though he was not happy with the team’s overall performance. “I am happy we won, but the performance was bad. We didn’t create chances and that’s how we got about our business today. But I am happy with the result,” he said. “Having drawn the last two matches here, this victory gives our fans something to smile about.” His counterpart Rodwell Dhlakama was disappointed with the defeat after dominated for long periods. “It’s a painful defeat considering that we dominated and created chances. It’s a game we could have won, but our defenders lacked concentration towards the end,” he said. Dhlakama attributed the defeat to the fact that Chapungu were not playing at their home matches at Ascot Stadium as the facility is yet to pass a fitness test to host topflight
matches. Teams Dynamos: S Chinani, T Muringai, G Mukambi, J Tigere, M Mawadza, A Maliselo, N Junior, T Chisi, (R Sackey, 46’), E Sadomba, T Macheke (N Mangala, 73’), S Jarrisson Chapungu: T Shumba, P Gumbo, H Mugoniwa, M Muchangami, G Mleya, I Nyoni, M Mavuto (B Mugoni, 54’), P Khumbula (E Chirape, 60’), N Hunga (W Mupasiri, 75’)