BY SPORTS REPORTER HIGHLY-RATED South Africa-born prop Henri Boshoff is relishing the opportunity to showcase his talent in Zimbabwe colours after he was named in the Sables’ starting XV to face Zambia in the two teams’ opening match of the Victoria Cup at the Machinery Exchange Stadium Harare Sports Club today. The 27-year-old loosehead prop, who plays for Romanian SuperLiga side Timisoara Saracens is one of the eight debutants named in Zimbabwe’s squad in the opening round of the new look tournament which also features Kenya and Uganda. Nelspruit-born Boshoff, whose career has seen him represent South African Golden Lions XV, Boland Cavaliers and Valke in the Currie Cup and Vodacom Cup
tournaments said he was surprised to get the call up to represent Zimbabwe and was excited at the new challenge. “It was interesting, I was really surprised that I got the call up but I was honoured at the same time because this weekend I will be running out for the first
cap and it is a real honour to represent Zimbabwe,” he said. “The Victoria Cup is going to be an immense challenge I feel that we have some good sides that we are facing and we have to really bring our ‘A-game’ if we
want to bring this one home. The guys have received me very well and the team culture is a wining one and it will snowball us into making some really good
history,” Boshoff said. Head coach Brendon Dawson believes the Victoria Cup is a key pillar in Zimbabwe’s bid to qualify and compete in the 2023 Rugby World Cup in France. “We are looking at our world cup preparations and these are really crucial games for us to get the right standard and the right levels for us to compete,” Dawson said. Boshoff together with fellow front rower Tyran Fagan, lock Godwin Mangenje, flanker Blithe Mavesere and eighthman Godfrey Muzanarwo will be making their debut
appearances in the forwards, while Martin Mangongo will be maiden appearance for the Sables as a winger. The buildup to the 15:30hrs kick-off will feature the Zimbabwe Lady Sables against Zambia Women’s national team and the school boy battle between rivals St Georges College and Churchill High School. Fixtures Zimbabwe Women v Zambia Women (1120hrs) St Georges College v Churchill High School (1300hrs) Zimbabwe v Zambia (1530hrs