Pakare Paye Arts Centre, Harare AFRO-FUSION singer, Ashton ‘Mbeu’ Nyahora is set to stage a show at Pakare Paye Arts Centre tomorrow, five months after his last performance at the centre. Tickets will be going for ZWL10, with the show starting at 8pm untill late. The Mavanga hit-maker, a beneficiary of the late Oliver Mtukudzi’s mentorship, said the show is meant to celebrate the life of Mtukudzi: “We are returning to perform at our place; where our father nurtured us. He groomed us to where we are today, so we are still going to celebrate his life. It would be more special to do it at our homestead.” Ahead of his album launch scheduled for August, Mbeu said he will be sampling some of the songs from the upcoming album during the show. Theatre Alliance Francaise, Harare RnB singer Nyasha David will launch his Extended Playlist (EP) tomorrow at Old Mutual Theatre Alliance Francaise with live performances from Brian K, Adrian Tate, Sylent Nqo, Prosper Mapurisa and Fusion 5, among others. Shamwari Joe Hotel, Mvurwi Dherira hit-maker Andy Muridzo and the Jeetaz Band will tonight perform at Shamwari Joe Hotel in Mashonaland Central’s Mvurwi town. Club 727, Filabusi Dendera musician Allan Chimbetu and Ochestra Dendera Kings will tonight stage a show at Club 727 in Filabusi. REPS Upstairs Theatre Songbird and guitarist Tariro neGitare will tomorrow perform at Unplugged set to be held at REPS Upstairs Theatre. Warren Park 1 Bar Sungura maestro Alick Macheso and Ochestra Mberikwazvo, supported by Tendai Dembo and Barura Express, will tonight perform at Warren Park 1 Bar near Magamba Shops. Chegutu Hotel Sweetie hit-maker Jah Signal, Hwinza of Lula Lula, DJ Buccaneer, DJ Fox, DJ Splash and Mc Kuda are set to perform at Necla’s birthday bash tomorrow at Chegutu Hotel. Chivhu Hall Talented guitarist and artiste Progress Chipfumo and the Sounds of Motherland  will be performing tonight at  Makiyi Little England in Mbare, whereas tomorrow  he will be  at Pamuzinda. On Sunday, he will be guest artiste at Chivhu Hall, performing alongside  Gari BM, Flectcher and  Sundex. 7 Arts Theatre, Avondale Prophet Tapiwa Freddy, known as T Freddy of Goodness and Mercy Ministries, is set to launch his fourth album at Seven Arts Theatre in Avondale, Harare, tonight. Club Manucho Dancehall artistes, including Blot–Grenade, Tasha, Ress Cici, Real Kid and Squiz, are set to perform at a Zimdancehall Gala to be held at Club Manucho along Simon Mazorodze Road in Waterfalls tonight. Motor Action Sports Club Comedienne and Entrepreneur Mai Titi will be celebrating her 35th birthday at Moto Action Sports Club on Sunday alongside local DJs and surprise guest artistes. Ganya Nite Club Dancehall chanter Ricky Fire will tomorrow be performing at Ganya Nite Club in Highfield – former Maombera Building in Gazaland – alongside   Junior Fire, Balancer,
Junior Spragga and many more.