SOCIAL media personality and comedienne Felistus Murata Edwards, popularly known as Mai Titi (pictured), says she did not always have it easy in life, but having fought her way out of the clutches of poverty, she has not forgotten where she came from and continues to reach out to the needy. BY PRECIOUS CHIDA As part of Thantabantu Trust, an organisation that helps the needy, Mai Titi has been travelling to Plumtree to assist orphans, widows and the disabled in those communities. She told NewsDay Life & Style yesterday that her heart lies with the vulnerable people. “I understand the meaning of being less privileged, and I understand how it feels when nobody is there to take care of you since I have passed through those stages in my life. So, I always want to help people around me even with the little that I have, just to put a smile on their faces,” she said. The comedienne said she  has promised to pay fees for a child-headed family in Plumtree, adding that she will be celebrating her birthday with children living on the streets of Harare. Mai Titi recently scooped an award for Women of Excellence in Zimbabwe on the basis of her work with the disabled in the community, in conjunction with Ruth Pasi Foundation from Australia. Mai Titi said she felt honoured by the recognition as she did not realise someone was noticing her gestures. “I feel great and a bit emotional about it because sometimes I do things, thinking that I am just doing it for the sake of pleasing my heart and without expecting anything back, but I just realised that there are some people who will be observing me. It is surprising that the foundation that is awarding me is all the way from Australia. I feel really honoured,” she said. Popular for her hilarious jests, Mai Titi rose to fame with her comic videos on social media platforms. She now has thousands of followers from across the globe. The comedienne was also a recipient of the Top Female Entertainment and Social Media Enterprise Business Leader of the Year Award in 2018.