BY DEMETRIA MANYONGA Veteran dancehall sensation, Ricky Fire, will on Saturday make a grand return to the stage with a show at the newly revived Ganya Night Club at Gazaland in Highfields on Saturday The artiste, who is popular with club busters like Ndiratidze Zvaunoita, Unorararika, Karikuvharia Paghetto, among others, will have a chance to prove his mettle as he is likely to face a highly expectant crowd after some time off the mic. In addition to the high expectations,  Ricky Fire, who has been a subject of debate over his status in the dancehall circles, will likely use this show to flaunt his new brand, which is characterised by formal English wear. Ricky Fire has since started working with a new manager Collin Jichichi, who told NewsDay Weekender that the artiste had to rebrand  to  dresse like Jamaican Dancehall kings. “Ricky Fire is among the artistes who started dancehall music in the early days in Zimbabwe and now his comeback will take the crowd now he is a grown artiste and he has upgraded his music,” he said. “Just like Jamaican dancehall super stars Ricky Fire now dresses like Sizzla Kalonji and Capleton and as a leader he is expected to lead by example.” Jichichi promised the fans a great night at Ganya Night club as Ricky fire is set to perform his latest songs tomorrow. “People should expect nothing but the best from the king of dancehall as he is set to perfume songs like Mbuya Kwindi, Ndiri Munhuwo a song he did with bounty Lisa and has raised a lot of eyebrows as people assumed the two were an item among other songs. “This is a big show as Ricky Fire will be celebrating the birth of his son.” Ganya Night Club owner Milton Muganda said he was bringing Ricky Fire to Gazaland in line with the club’s vision to be a hub of all forms of musical entertainment in the ghetto.
“As you have noticed that we have often brought sungura artistes, but as part of our vision to brand Ganya as the paradise for ghetto music, we will be having Ricky Fire and more artistes from different genres.”