BY XOLISANI NCUBE Government has taken delivery of health equipment valued at more than US$1 million from the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and India as part of efforts to improve the health delivery system. With most public health institutions operating without essential equipment and drugs, Cabinet yesterday announced that the equipment would make the health delivery system more  competitive. Briefing the media after yesterday’s Cabinet, Information minister Monica Mutsvangwa said the equipment was as a result of President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s re-engagement with the international community, where he extended an appeal for support towards revival of Zimbabwe’s health delivery system. “A recent needs assessment of the hospitals had revealed the acute shortage of state-of-the-art equipment in critical areas such as radiology, intensive care units, theatres, laboratories, renal units, paediatric care and maternity, among others,” she said. “The UAE government has accordingly donated to the government of Zimbabwe the following hospital equipment: Five dialysis machines, six vital signs monitors, eight respiratory aid devices, 12 neonatal intensive care unit monitors and 12 paediatric incubators. The consignment which is estimated at US$400 000 is earmarked for Harare Central Hospital.” Mutsvangwa said government has also purchased various equipment from India valued at US$650 000. “The equipment received from India includes the following: 10 hydraulic theatre tables, 10 electric theatre tables, five  ventilators for adults, five  ventilators for paediatrics, 50 monitors for adults, 30 monitors for paediatrics, 36 neonatal intensive care unit incubators, five endoscopy units, five colonoscopy units, 10 respiratory aid devices neonatal intermittent positive pressure ventilator, 20 electro cardiogram, four X-ray portable and 10 anaesthetic machines,” she said “Another consignment to the tune of US$300 000 shall be arriving in the country shortly. Government is paying for the consignments coming from India.” Cabinet also discussed the recent launch on Sunday in Niamey, Niger of the operational phase of the African Continental Free Trade Area. According to Mutsvangwa, Cabinet also received the weekly brief on the energy and power supply situation from acting Energy minister Joel Biggie Matiza. “Cabinet noted that, following meetings between President Mnangagwa and his South African and Mozambican counterparts, the two Heads of State had expressed their countries’ firm commitment to assist Zimbabwe to overcome its current energy and power supply challenges. As a consequence of this encouraging development, the Energy and Power Development minister Fortune Chasi is currently in South Africa, and is soon to head to Mozambique for detailed discussions with his counterparts on possible increased power imports for Zimbabwe,” Mutsvangwa said. Also Mutsvangwa said Cabinet noted with concern the dilapidated state of water and sanitation infrastructure in most of urban local authorities.