BY TAFADZWA KACHIKO AFRO-fusion star Ashton “Mbeu” Nyahora, backed by his Mhodzi Tribe and award-winning dance choreographer John Cole, are set to headline the inaugural Mitambo Festival at Belgravia Sports Club in Harare today. The fiesta — which seeks to promote indigenous games, music and food — will also see Military Touch Movement DJ Bernard “Iroq” Fato and Scarra the Drummer (real name Delroy Maripakwenda) performing. Award-winning Zimdancehall chanter Enzo Ishall, Madam Boss and Maneta Mazanhi will also make an appearance. Event organiser Junior Bakasa told NewsDay Life & Style that the event was inspired by the late music icon and national hero Oliver “Tuku” Mtukudzi’s song Tsika Dzedu, adding that Mbeu was roped in as a participant because of his expertise in performing Tuku Music renditions. “I love Tuku Music and one of his songs, Tsika Dzedu, actually inspired the fiesta. It’s a plea to revive our old school games and culture. Mbeu does good covers for Tuku songs and having been mentored by the legend, he becomes the best candidate. He is good in his own right and is among artistes who promote the Zimbabwean culture. Cole is a diverse dance choreographer. He will work with Scarra the Drummer on a very unique set to bring out a whole new meaning to dance and drums,” he said. “It’s a celebration of who we are as Zimbabweans and Africans. The festivities will include traditional meals and games such as nhodo, tsoro and hwishu. It’s a very unique recreational activity, because most events usually have the same vibe, music, food and alcohol. The need to celebrate being African made us position it on Africa Day. It brings together people of different generations to relive and recreate childhood memories. It’s a day to hangout with family and friends.” Bakasa indicated that a lot of people had shown interest to be a part of this festival, which will also take place in Bulawayo on September 28. “Many people are looking forward to this exciting and unique event. We have been getting a lot of messages from people suggesting that we add more games, highlighting how excited people are. If you have ever been in the ghetto and played these games, then come through, socialise and reminisce on the past. It’s not competitive at the moment, but just recreational, braaing and enjoying music,” he said. “We also want schools to take up indigenous games as part of their physical education and sport in the long run and compete, but we have to start somewhere. As a result and to make this a reality, we have roped in the Ministry of Youth, Sports, Arts and Recreation to facilitate on the day,” he said.