devotion column Erasmus Makarimayi EVERYONE has a story to tell. In this instalment, I will look at lessons that are very important, beneficial and rewarding to learn so that one faces the future more organised and determined. As years go by, we should always learn lessons so that we don’t waste this precious and irreplaceable resource; time. There are four basic lessons that we should continuously learn as life goes by. Looking at your diary and inventory, the following become apparent. There are things that you need to do less. Probably you have been overindulging in practices that have become snares. All you need to do is cut down. Examples include, less time on social media, television and aimless mixing and mingling. This will help you stay away from gossipping and lying. Temptations of fornication and adultery would become more distant. You can make a list of the things you need to scale down and commit yourself to tackling them. There are habits and practices that unnecessarily chew a large chunk of your time. You need to be resolute and confront them and sever the veins drawing life out of you. Common practices that need reduction include eating and spending. Occasionally visit your budget and diet. In following up, you will also be made aware of things you need to do more. This could be more time with the family. Families tend to break down as members run up and down looking for sources of livelihood. You may consider spending more time praying, reading your Bible and pursuing your studies. Sometimes we lack the conscious awareness of ourselves because we are tied up with peripheral issues. Spare enough time to connect with your Maker, yourself and purpose. Time cut from unproductive things in your life should be allocated to more rewarding things. Resources saved from unnecessary things should be rechannelled towards those things beneficial. In most of the times, we all know what we need to put more commitment on, but lack the discipline to follow up. It is discipline that will give us victory. We, therefore, need to do whatever it takes to win. Initially, it may be painful, but if we do it step-by-step, we would prevail and the reward far outweighs the investment. Another area you should pay attention to is to determine what you don’t have answers for yet. Accepting that you need to research more or seek counsel is a force that will drive you to a positive response to some of your problem areas.  There are issues that you have to seek wisdom in order to handle them. What you currently know may be inadequate to address the magnitude of the challenge. After you have prayed and supplicated, you will do well to seek guidance and direction from those who have done well in that particular field. You may be well meaning, but lack of knowledge could be your undoing. Humble yourself and submit to higher knowledge. The more we learn, the more we appreciate that there are so many things to know which we don’t know yet. They say by the time we leave this realm, we would have learned fairly enough to begin earthly existence. So let’s never starve ourselves of wisdom. Lastly, after you have followed the above tips, you may find that there are still areas that remain unanswered. This is when you need to trust God for solutions. There are areas where you and the specialist may not have the correct answers. Prophetic knowledge may not have been revealed. The Bible states that there are secret things. Deuteronomy 29:29 reads: “The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law.” It is wisdom to trust God for solutions. Daniel says this of God our Father in Daniel 2:22: “He revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.” Surrender to God, who is omniscient and able in order for you to manage life wisely. Grace and peace be multiplied to you through knowledge. 