BY TERRY MADYAUTA FC PLATINUM gaffer Norman Mapeza is not taking Dynamos lightly despite their struggles this season and is expecting a tough tie when the two sides meet in a Castle Lager Premier Soccer League match at Mandava Stadium tomorrow afternoon. DeMbare are nine points behind FC Platinum, who are in second position behind early pacesetters Caps United on the league log. Anything other than maximum points could see Mapeza and his lieutenants lose more ground to Caps United, who themselves have issues to overcome as they host Chicken Inn on Sunday. Mapeza is expecting something much different, as the defending champions face an outfit whose pickings improved upon the arrival of Tonderai Ndiraya. The miners are in high spirits, coming from two wins over ZPC Kariba and Yadah Stars in their last two matches. Mapeza said the match against DeMbare was a huge clash, whose challenge they were looking forward to. “It’s a huge game for us as a club. It’s a huge game when you play against Dynamos because they have a huge following in the country. We always cherish those games like when we play
them (Dynamos),” he said. “Dynamos will always be Dynamos. They remain one of the biggest football institutions in the country despite their challenges, so we need to give them the respect they deserve. “They might have challenges, but it’s normal in this industry. Even in Europe it happens. Football changes time and again, but they remain a threat.” Mapeza predicted that Dynamos would rise high under Ndiraya and he warned that his side could be victims of a resurgent Dynamos. “They will bounce back and I believe what is important for them is to keep believing and working hard,” he said. “Games against Tonderai Ndiraya-coached teams are always entertaining. We worked together, he is a good coach and I know it will be difficult, but we will see.” It will be interesting to see how Mapeza will set up his backline, as they miss the services of Lawrence Mhlanga, who is on national duty. Rapheal Mudiviwa will miss the crucial tie as he is nursing a broken collar bone. They might be forced to play Godknows Murwira in the right full-back position, who has lately been playing in central midfield.