BY MTHANDAZO NYONI THE Zimbabwe Environmental Law Association (ZELA) has urged government to urgently implement the extractive industries transparency initiative (EITI) to promote openness and accountability. In a petition, Zela and different stakeholders said they were deeply concerned with mining investment in communities such as Chivi district where there is total disregard of principles of good business practices and human rights. “Saddened by lack of clarity on Murowa (Diamonds’) longevity in diamond prospecting in the area which dates to more than 20 years ago with no tangible investment in the local community, we now, therefore, call on the government of Zimbabwe and its relevant stakeholders to urgently implement EITI, a progressive initiative in the advancement of open and accountable management of the extractive industry,” reads the petition in part. “The extractive industry remains the main source of fiscal support, not only to Zimbabwe, but also to other regional economies.” Zela demanded government to urgently review, enact and enforce strong policy and legal frameworks that support contract disclosure. “For citizens, parliamentarians and other relevant stakeholders to monitor and analyse the public benefit from contract deals, contracts must be made publicly available. Contract disclosure has the potential to reduce corruption, fraud and other negative impacts that inhibit socio-economic growth,” it said. It also urged government to compel business actors to contribute to real economic growth, failure of which can lead to negative externalities, environmental damage, pollution and negative social patterns around operations which are rarely quantified. Government was also urged to promote community access to environmental information including ensuring that environmental rehabilitation is at the core of mining companies’ environmental impact assessments and that these must be followed to the letter. “(Government should) promote public citizen engagement with business; lack of cooperation between the two restricts citizens’ participation in decision-making and deliberately impose limitations to them in safeguarding economic, social and cultural rights in their communities,” it said. Zela said government should formulate and implement laws and policies that promote the utilisation of natural resources for sustainable national development and these should be in tune with the Africa mining vision and progressive international norms and standards.