By Sindiso Dube Dynamos FC coach Tonderai Ndiraya this weekend comes face-to-face with his former pay masters Ngezi Platinum when the two teams clash in a Castle Lager Premier Soccer League match at Rufaro Stadium, where both sides will be desperate for a win. Ngezi Platinum Stars, now under Dutchman Erol Akbay, were frustrated to a home 1-1 draw against Yadah Stars, while DeMbare lost their first match since Ndiraya took over, about four weeks ago, with a 2-0 defeat to Bulawayo Chiefs. This match will be important for Ndiraya for a number of reasons. He will lead his “worst” ever Dynamos squad, according to the coach, to Zvishavane for another tough encounter with champions FC Platinum the following weekend. The match comes after Ndiraya’s bubble, which had lasted for three matches with no loss, burst. His two-year stint with the ambitious platinum miners ended last year after the executive showed him the exit door for failure to win the title, with the team eventually finishing second. The former Dynamos midfielder said the Sunday match will be emotional for him, as he shares some history with the Mhondoro-based side. “The clash with Ngezi will be an emotional one because I had a good time there and worked well with everyone there. We also have to be realistic, we are playing a team which was second on the log. Though they didn’t start well this season, we just have to try and lift ourselves and be at their level,” the DeMbare mentor said. “Two and half years is not a short time in a system. We enjoyed huge success there and that will make the game exciting and we will work hard to get maximum points.” Ndiraya said his team’s display at the weekend might have psychologically affected his youthful side and so he would have to work on the players ahead of the Ngezi tie. “We have a huge psychological dent on the players and we have to work hard and try to work on their spirits because the games we are playing next are not easy,” he said. “We meet Ngezi Platinum and then we travel to Mandava for a date with the champions, FC Platinum. We need to be at our best and have to fight more. I didn’t see much fighting in the Bulawayo Chiefs match. I think there were stages where we were a bit complacent. We hope to get a result from the Ngezi match and hope we will be ready
psychologically.” Weekend Fixtures Saturday: Chicken Inn v Black Rhinos (Luveve), Herentals v Chapungu (NSS), Yadah v FC Platinum (Rufaro), ZPC Kariba v Manica Diamonds (Nyamhunga) Sunday: Triangle v Bulawayo Chiefs (Gibbo), Mushowani v Harare City (NSS), Hwange v Caps United (Colliery), Tel One v Highlanders (Barbourfields), Dynamos v Ngezi Platinum Stars (Rufaro)