By Sindiso Dube TELONE FC . . . . . . . . . 0
HIGHLANDERS FC . . . . . (1)1 A WELL-TAKEN first-half goal by the pint-sized Ray Lunga gave struggling Highlanders their first win of the season after they accounted for TelOne at Babourfields Stadium in Bulawayo, yesterday. Lunga’s goal which came from a Prince Dube pass was the first goal scored by the side in Bulawayo. It was also the third goal that the team has scored this season. There were scenes of joy and jubilation from Bosso fans and players after the match as the monkey finally came off the back. Bosso had become a laughing stock in the league with their struggles which saw them sink into the relegation zone. Bosso gaffer Madinda Ndlovu acknowledged that his team did not play particularly well, but he was happy with the win. “It’s a good result for everyone, but as much as we won we did not play good  football compared to how we did against Hwange and Herentals. Luck was on our side,” he observed. TelOne coach Jairos Tapera said his team was unlucky to come out with nothing. “I believe we played well today, although we failed to get a goal. We dominated the match and created more scoring opportunities than Highlanders, but we were unlucky not to get a goal,” Tapera said. Ndlovu fielded a new-look frontline with Dube flanked by Lunga and Cleopas Kapupurika. The match was balanced in the first half with both teams creating scoring oppotunities. Ndlovu was forced to replace Lunga with Godfrey Makaruse after the former picked up an injury. He also had to take out left back Mbongeni Ndlovu for Mbekezeli Sibanda, also following an injury. TelOne were reduced to one man less after Bushiri was sent off following a second bookable offence in the 75th minute when he recklessly tackled Prince Dube. Teams: Tel One: R Pitsi, T  Chikore, F.Bushiri, M.Chigumira, I Zambezi, J Jam, E Zinyama, M Moyo (F Muza 53), E.Mandiranga, T Sibanda (M Ponyera 80), J.Muzokomba Highlanders: A Sibanda, B Banda (T Makanda 77) C Kapupurike, R Lunga (G Makaruse 53), N Masuku, A Mbeba, T Ndlovu, P Muduhwa, M Ndlovu (M Sibanda), P Dube, B Sibanda