By Sindiso Dube IN-FORM army side Black Rhinos coach Hebert Maruwa says they are approaching today’s match against Chicken Inn in search of maximum points that will take them to the top of the log. The match will kick off at 3pm at Luveve Stadium. Chauya Chipembere, as Black Rhinos are affectionately known, have won four of their last five matches, with their only blemish being the defeat to Mushowani Stars. On the other hand, Chicken Inn are also enjoying a purple patch after putting together three wins on the trot and will be fancying their chances playing at home. Rhinos are aware that they face a tough challenge, but are still looking at grabbing all three points on stake. “We are ready for the encounter against Chicken Inn. They have a good side which is playing well. They also have a good coach, but we will come to the party and history favours us. Last year, we managed to collect four points against them so we expect a good clash. We are going into the match with a positive mind so that we get a positive result. We need to catch up with the teams on top,” Maruwa said. Chicken Inn coach Joey Antipas said they were expecting a challenging match against Rhinos. “Rhinos are a good team. They have been posting good results lately. We expect a different match from our last encounters with them, which is going to be difficult. But it will be a good match. Preparations are going on well in camp and we are looking forward to continuing with the same form from our last encounter,” he said. “We will respect the team we are playing. We will also bring in a fighting spirit so that we get a positive result,” he said. Antipas praised the league’s top scorer and May Player of the Month, Clive Augusto’s performances. “Clive is a hard worker and I commend his workrate and discipline. He is doing everything for himself to succeed and be a top player in the land,” Antipas said. Chicken Inn will miss the services of Xolani Ndlovu, who took a knock in last week’s encounter against Chapungu. Missing will also be Innocent Muchaneka and Passmore Benard, who are both nursing injuries.