BY KENNETH NYANGANI ALARM bells are starting to toll at Triangle as the Castle Lager Premier Soccer League side sank closer to the relegation zone following their home draw against basement side Bulawayo Chiefs. Since their win over Highlanders last month, Triangle went on a four match losing streak, which they arrested with a draw on Sunday, but it was hardly a result that would please any of their fans. While the situation is slowly degenerating, coach Taurai Mangwiro sees light at the end of the tunnel and is looking to build from that single point they collected against Chiefs.
He said the league was more difficult this season and no teams can be taken for granted. “We need to remain positive. This is a tough league. I believe that every team is good. This is going to be the toughest season we have played (so far),” he said. “We needed to win against Bulawayo Chiefs so that we restore our confidence, but we collected a point. It is good because we know that we need to start from somewhere. In our next match we are playing at home against Mushowani. This is a big match for us and there are certain aspects we need to work on. What we are going through happens in football, but we are still positive.” Having won just two matches and a similar number of draws, Triangle have eight points and sit 14th on the 18-team league log. Some of the established names in the league have been struggling so far this season while the new comers have held their own. Only one of the four promoted teams is sitting in the relegation zone with the others showing that they are in the topflight to stay. Even Mushowani, who sit in the red zone, have started to pick up points and their win over Harare City on Sunday shows how much they have improved in their short spell in the league. Last week they were unlucky not to get a result against log leaders Caps United, falling 3-2 after a spirited display where they threatened to take all three points. Manica Diamonds and TelOne would be pleased with their performances so far with 12 and 10 points respectively, but it is Chapungu, who are in dreamland, sitting fourth on the table, concerning themselves more with what is happening above them than below. Chapungu are five points behind pacesetters Caps United.