BY SINDISO DUBE ORAGNISERS of Miss Tourism Zimbabwe will take the search for this year’s beauty queen to Victoria Falls as Matabeleland North province hosts its auditions on Saturday and Sunday at Invuvu Restaurant. The pageant is seeking a replacement of Tafadzwa Jaricha who is seeing out her reign. A lawyer with Mhungu and Associates Legal Practitioners in Mutare, Jaricha was crowned the country’s tourism queen in September last year. Chantelle Dlamini (19) was crowned Miss Matabeleland North in last year’s provincial finals while Hannah Maramba (20) from Hwange and Ivy Ncube (17) from Victoria Falls were voted first and second princesses, respectively. The three finalists automatically won tickets to represent Matabeleland North province in the national finals which were held in Bulawayo in September. For one to be admitted for the auditions they have to be aged between 18 and 24 years and should never have been married or given birth. They are also expected to have a valid passport and national identification document. The models should come clad in black jeans, white tops and heels. The pageant’s Matabeleland North provincial co-ordinator Shauntel Nkomo said all was set for the auditions. “Last year we had a good run for the auditions and the provincial finals. We are ready for this year’s edition which will start with auditions on Saturday and Sunday from 9am to 3pm at Invuvu Restaurant. We invite all aspiring models to come and try their luck for the biggest pageant in the country,” she said. Models are also required to pay an administration fee of $15. “An administration fee of $15 is required from every participant. Since we are dealing with young girls we advise everyone to notify their parents or guardian of their desire to participate. We don’t want a situation where people come and contest without the knowledge of their elders which in turn gives a bad reputation to the pageant. “Good behaviour is one of the principles we look into when we are choosing our contestants and we want that to be practiced first from homes before coming into camp,” she said.