BY FORTUNE MBELE Form Guide Highlanders 	W D L D D ZPC Kariba  	D L W L W FOLLOWING their first win in the 2019 Castle Lager Premier Soccer League last week Highlanders coach Madinda Ndlovu (pictured) reckons the hitherto sleeping giant might have awoken. Bosso scored their first goal at Barbourfields Stadium this season to dispatch newboys TelOne 1-0 as the Bulawayo giants tried to shake off a difficult start to the campaign. Prior to last week, Bosso had only scored two goals from their first eight matches through striker Prince Dube, albeit losing to Harare City away as well as via a penalty by goalkeeper Ariel Sibanda in the 1-1 draw against Black Rhinos, also away from home. Their third goal of the season was scored last weekend by the diminutive Ray Lunga and Ndlovu hopes for better things to come as they return to Emagumeni on Sunday against ZPC
Kariba. “I saw people dancing without their shirts. It was like Christmas. Hopefully the win was a turning point for good things to come for Highlanders,” Ndlovu said. He said the win had brought some remarkable change in camp and it was visible in his boys even at training. “The most notable thing going forward is that the mental strength of the players is almost up to scratch now. The belief that they are in it this season is very visible when they come for training. Confidence in terms of personality is very visible, competition at training shows that the players want to be in the team and one would only hope that it would be carried into all the games to come so that we start competing among the best.”
Despite injuries in the squad, Ndlovu is happy that Charlton Siamalonga, Lunga and Mbongeni Ndlovu are back in the fold. MacClive Phiri and Bukhosi will, however, be on the sidelines for some time. “We have the boys who can carry the season for Highlanders in terms of intelligence and the ability to play a game at any stage or under pressure. They can stand that. Hopefully the loose ends were tied last week. We will begin to see the real Highlanders going forward,” the coach said. With only one win so far in nine games, five draws and three defeats, another win on Sunday might lift them from the unfamiliar position 16 on the log table.