BY FREEMAN MAKOPA LOCAL dancehall star Tocky Vibes has hinted on a collaboration with Zambian songbird Mampi on a yet to be named song to be released between July and August. The Zambian performer known for her Walilowelera hit song met Tocky Vibes in the United Kingdom, where they shared the stage in a series of shows organised for their fans abroad. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style yesterday, Tocky Vibes said he has received the instrumental from Mampi and is now working on the lyrics for the song which will be a surprise package for their fans. “I am currently working on a song with Mampi after we met on tour, we could have done the song in Australia, but we could not find time and we have seen it fit to do it now,” he said. “They have sent me the instrument since they are the ones who wanted to do a song with me and I am working on the lyrics. We will announce the name of the song soon.” He said working with the Zambian diva will help spread the music around Zambia and the region. “Working with Mampi has some advantages in the sense that our fan base will increase here in Zimbabwe and Zambia as well. It is good for business for us to have more of these collaborations,” he said. Tocky Vibes said he was working with I MUSIK, who he described as a good producer with a lot to offer in the future of Zimdancehall. Meanwhile, Tocky Vibes is also working with his compatriot Soul Jah Love on a new song called Vakorinde expected to hit the streets next month. “We are also working on a new project with Soul Jah Love. I don’t want to dwell much on it, but just know that in everything we do in life there are only two Vakorinte and even the Bible says many are called, but few are chosen and that is the case,” he said. “We went through struggles to be who we are today so that is what we are portraying in this new song and we will release the song next month with a video by Andy Cutter. I am also happy that we have finished our own album Villagers Money Vol 2 which will be out on June 21.”