BY SINDISO DUBE CAPS UNITED 	W W L W W CHICKEN INN 	D W W W L Chicken Inn’s in-form striker Clive Augusto has promised the club’s fans goals and maximum points when they take on Castle Lager Premier Soccer League pacesetters Caps United at the National Sports Stadium on Sunday. The Gamecocks were held to a goalless draw by Black Rhinos, but could have won the match had Augusto converted gilt-edged chances that came his way in the early stages of that
match. Augusto has scored eight goals in nine matches for Chicken Inn, leading the scorers’ chart in the topflight league and was voted the Castle Lager Player of the Month for May. He has pledged to rediscover his touch in their contest against the table toppers. “We are preparing well for the match knowing that we will be facing a club which is on fire and leading the log. We respect them and that we are playing them in their backyard, but we
will work hard to manage a set of maximum points, especially after dropping two points at home against Black Rhinos. We need the three points. We are going there to play as a team in search of maximum points. Hopefully by the end of 90 minutes we will come out with positive results,” Augusto said. The 24-year-old former Ngezi Platinum forward said he was relishing to find the net to increase his impressive tally and make up for last week’s miss. “I want to score on the day. I am employed by Chicken Inn as a striker and my job is to score goals. I want to score on the day and make it up for last week’s miss. I was really disappointed last week, but I will continue creating scoring opportunities,” he said. However, it will not be a stroll in the park for Augusto against veteran defender Method Mwanjale, who is also in top form for the Green Machine at the back. Caps United are oozing with confidence after despatching Hwange 3-0 at the Colliery last week. They will be missing the services of defender Valentine Musarurwa, while Chicken Inn will be without midfielder Sipho Ndlovu, as both are suspended after accumulating three yellow cards each. Augusto has become one of Chicken Inn’s top players after signing for the Bulawayo side this season, having only scored three goals last season for Ngezi Platinum.