By Sindiso Dube HIGHLANDERS FC’s woes continue to mount following the sidelining of their two rightbacks, Bukhosi Ncube and McClive Phiri, through injuries. The absence of the two defenders, expected to return after the mid-season break, is set to create more problems for an already struggling squad, which has gone for eight matches without a win, only managing two goals during the process. Those two goals were both scored away from home and their home fans are yet to witness any goal celebration this term. With the poor form, Bosso have sunk into the relegation zone and are under pressure to start putting together wins. After sitting out for the whole of last season due to a knee injury, Ncube will again be sidelined for the greater part of the season, after picking up an injury in their match against Triangle at Barbourfields Stadium. Ncube sat out almost the entire season last year after picking up a knee injury in the opening fixtures of 2018. He picked up another long term injury in the early stages of the match against Triangle and was replaced by Andrew Mbeba in a match that saw Bosso losing 1-0. On Sunday, Phiri was rushed to hospital after he crashed against a pole following an off-the-ball push by Tinotenda Benza. The incident left Phiri with a fractured humerus, the bone between the elbow and shoulder, and coach Madinda Ndlovu was forced to field centre-back Mbeba in his position. Doctors have confirmed that Phiri will miss action for at least six weeks. “The doctors confirmed that Phiri would miss at least six weeks of action as he recovers from his injury of a fractured right humerus and he will undergo surgery,” club spokesperson Ronald Moyo said. “It was unfortunate for Phiri and also for the team to be sidelined for that long especially at this time when the team is trying to turn the tables around with results.” Left-back Mbongeni Ndlovu was also Benza’s victim after he was pushed against the perimeter fence and had to go through the rest of the match with a bandage on his left arm. Bosso will play a tricky encounter with Premiership newboys TelOne, who have posted good results in the last couple of weeks, beating champions FC Platinum before holding Manica Diamonds to a one-all draw away from home at the weekend.