BY WINSTONE ANTONIO TEENAGE music sensation Thamsanqa “Tammy” Moyo is breaking new ground in music, by-passing promoters and organising her own shows. While traditionally musicians have been booking shows through promoters and being paid by the promoter after the show, Tamy has decided to depart from the norm. Tamy, a rising Afro-pop songbird, is set to put up her own show, The Tamy Experience, on June 6 at The Venue in Avondale, Harare. The event will also feature top female musicians — Ammara Brown and Gemma Griffiths — in a high stakes showdown. The concert comes against the backdrop of some fans, promoters and other stakeholders in the arts sector spreading a “false narrative” that female artistes did not attract significant business because they drew smaller crowds. Tamy’s manager Pedzi Chimbwanda told NewsDay Life & Style last week that the concert was set to prove that female artistes could hold their own on the big stage. “Our female artistes are a stakeholder market who can do the same or even better on those big stages than their male counterparts,” he said “This year, as a camp, we are stepping out and vying for impact both locally and beyond the borders. With an album and a couple of tours in the pipeline, this concert will be a debut of the complete experience we intend to create for fans in 2019.” The concert’s advance tickets are selling at US$15 or ZWL$75 on www.clicknpay.africa, while on the day of the show they will be sold for US$25 or ZWL$125. The teenage sensation has a rich history in music, having shared the stage with international artistes including Joe Thomas and top local artistes like the late music superstar Oliver Mtukudzi, Stunner, Ba Shupi and Alexio Kawara. She is currently riding high with an Afro RnB track, Kwandinobva that has an accompanying video as an appetiser off her yet to be named forthcoming album. “Kwandinobva celebrates where I come from, but we took style references from across Africa, because I also want to celebrate the beauty and diversity of just being African in general. We also mixed it up in a contemporary African way that reflects the modern day African,” Tammy said.