BY Tinashe Mungazi HWANGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..0
CAPS UNITED . . . . . . . . . . . . .(2) 3 A TRIP to Hwange was billed to be one of Caps United’s biggest tests of their pedigree to challenge for the league title this season. The Green Machine passed the examination with flying colours with another commanding performance away from home which took them back to the top of the Castle Lager Premier Soccer League table. After one of their rivals at the top of the log FC Platinum had won their match on Saturday, Caps ill afforded to drop points and they responded in the perfect manner, also taking advantage of Chicken Inn’s stumble after drawing with Black Rhinos at home. Joel Ngodzo scored a double while John Zhuwawu weighed in with a first-half strike as Caps United thrashed the home side. The Harare giants settled nerves soon into the match as Ngodzo capitalised on a defensive mistake by Felix Chindungwe to put the visitors into the lead after just two minutes.
On 22 minutes, Caps had doubled their lead after Zhuwawu connected from a Valentine Musarurwa set piece. The match was a one-sided affair as Caps launched waves of attacks with goalkeeper Taimon Mvula forced into saves, particularly in the first half. Caps United’s wingers, Gabriel Nyoni and Phenias Bhamusi were at their menacing best, constantly troubling the Hwange defence. After the match, Caps United coach Lloyd Chitembwe was full of praise for his charges after they made their seventh win of the season having so far scored 18 goals in the nine matches they have played. Their defence, which had started to leak goals of late, finally kept a clean sheet, something that Chitembwe had demanded of them prior to the match. “It was a high-class performance, we were at a different level. Technically we showed our supremacy and tactically we were spot on and things went the way we had planned. The boys were very strong mentally and we got what we wanted,” Chitembwe said. Hwange coach Nation Dube was stunned by the early goals his team conceded and this put them on the back foot. “Those two mistakes at the back early on cost us the match. We fell under pressure after those two goals and it was difficult to come back. We are looking forward to the next match so that we can rectify things,” Dube said. Hwange, who started off the season on a high note, seem to have lost their rhythm as yesterday’s defeat was the fourth from their last six matches.