BY SHARON SIBINDI RUNAKO Beauty Products is set to hold a natural hair and beauty expo at Homestead Conference Centre in Bulawayo tomorrow. The expo is aimed at encouraging women obsessed with artificial beauty products to embrace their natural looks. Artificial hair, including “Brazilian” hair pieces and other such beauty accessories, have become a hit with women from all walks of life. Runako founder, Ropafadzo Muzari, told NewsDay Life & Style in Harare that African women usually felt inadequate in their natural hair and skin texture. “In the long run, the hair will suffer as it becomes weaker, brittle and prone to damage. The same goes for the skin, which ends up with patches and in some cases results in skin cancer. With this being said, we want to educate women on the goodness of being a naturalist,” she said. “We want to help the modern woman to be able to take care of their natural hair and still feel like a queen, wherever they go. We want to teach women how to style their natural hair for all types of events. Women do not need to wear weaves in order to fit in, or to be characterised as classy and elegant.” Muzari also said their intention was to teach women how to care for their skin using natural products and still achieve the same glow as one using chemical-laden products, yet without any side effects. “So what inspired us is the fact that there has never been any event of this kind in Bulawayo. We are aiming to make it an annual event. We believe this is the right time to raise awareness and educate women on the goodness of being a naturalist,” she said. Muzari said the people of Bulawayo will benefit as the day will be lined up with a number of exhibitors who are based in Bulawayo who will have the chance to market themselves to make people aware that the products are available in Bulawayo and hence supporting locally-made products. She said she was also working with several stakeholders, including a Bulawayo-based manufacturer of organic hair products, Tamie Ronney and Mkamyeziyethu Malunga-Mkosana from GANU, Yolanda Ngwenya from BAKHAR and Nicole Sibanda from Manelnicky.