SNEAK PEEK: Winstone Antonio GOSPEL musician Pax Gomo, who caused ripples on the gospel music scene several years ago with tracks such as Moyo Unonyengera and Iye Woga, is set to come from hibernation and break a six–year silence with the launch of a new 14-track album, Basa Ringamirirei? The album will be launched tomorrow at Safe Hands Day Care Centre in Westwood, Kambuzuma. The centre is home to physically-handicapped children. NewsDay (ND) Life & Style reporter, Winstone Antonio, caught up with Gomo (PG), who spoke on his music and other related issues. ND: You have been in hibernation since the release of your last album, Hwiba, in 2013. What has been going on? PG: True, I sound quiet, but I was not really quiet as I have been doing some recordings behind the scenes. I just got some corporate engagements as brand ambassador, hence I was focusing on corporate programmes for the Agricultural Marketing Authority and Gremlock Private Limited. ND: Tomorrow, you will be launching Basa Ringamirirei? What inspired the album? PG: We had starved our fans for long and have not given them new music. This will come to an end tomorrow (today), with the launch of Basa Ringamirirei. The album title was inspired by the fact that I have an evangelistic calling. Many a times we tend to pull off or backslide because of life’s mishaps. So, I felt the title would encourage somebody not to stop doing what they are supposed to do, but to keep up the pace. The album has three environmental songs and as usual, our evangelistic revival and worship songs. ND: You will launch this album at a children’s home, why such a gesture? PG: This is more of a calling. It has been six years of a strong calling to do this with such children. These are very important people  who we often leave out when doing programmes.
So, my spirit strongly challenged me to give them the most special part of my music ministry, that is, to go and do an album with them so that they become the first ones to hear it as well as celebrate my birthday. Their prayers are more special to me than bidding for my CDs as is the norm at album launches. Whoever wanted to buy me a fruit for my birthday, I am saying come and buy for these friends of mine. Those who wanted to buy me sweets, please, come and let’s break those sweets together. ND: Any collaborations on this album? PG: Yes, there are two collaborations, one with Apostle Vusi, a top worshiper from Botswana and another with dendera singer, Sulumani Chimbetu. ND: How many albums have you recorded since you became a professional musician? PG: So far, this is our seventh gospel album, although I also did two environmental albums. On this latest album, I have put four environmental songs. The environmental songs are the gospel according to Genesis 2 verse 16, when God ordered man to keep and tend the garden. But in this case, I am just encouraging people to find sustainable means to clean energy, that is, resorting to biogas, solar energy and wood-saver stoves in order to at least be the keeper of the garden, I am so excited to include these four songs on a gospel music album as I dearly think the church should take the leading role in protecting the environment, as climate change affects every citizen. ND: How best can you describe the state of gospel music in Zimbabwe? PG: Zimbabwe gospel is growing although there are a lot of similarities in sound. Maybe it is because of the digital age, but I can safely say we are trying, although we still have to stretch out our nets. There is a lot more genres we have not explored. There is no genre that is considered not worthy to praise the Lord with. ND: Your parting shot? PG: It is really our humble moment to have been granted such an opportunity to minister at Safe Hands Day Care Centre. I am looking forward to continue being granted such moments with people in such conditions.