BY TAFADZWA KACHIKO A CHINHOYI University of Technology (CUT) student Karen Kaseke’s thought-provoking solo exhibition, which ran from Monday until Wednesday at the Apostolic Faith Mission’s Light Christian College in Cranborne, Harare, exposed how government officials appear to be Good Samaritans yet behind the scenes, they were corrupt. Kaseke, a visual communication and multimedia design student told NewsDay Life & Style that her exhibition, themed The Revelation, portrayed how government only offers temporary solutions to problems being faced by Zimbabweans. “Most of my artefacts are thought provoking. These include, Behind Their Scenes, Temporary Solutions and Tomb of the Lost Soldiers. Behind Their Scenes exposes how government officials live lavishly, buying each other fancy cars and houses at the expense of the poor. To us, all they preach is that ‘Zimbabwe Is Open for Business’ hiding behind their sins,” she said. “Temporary Solutions depicts our current lifestyle, where we are using the ZWL$, which is not reliable. We want a real currency that builds businesspeople and the general people’s confidence. We want free education and healthcare services, among others, but what we see at the moment are just unyielding temporary solutions. That’s why the first toothpaste is torn and the second is a full tube, which shows Zimbabweans’ expectations.” Meanwhile, CUT’s deputy dean in the School of Arts and Design, Julius Nyamubaya, revealed that the institution has plans to rebrand the bachelor of fine art (BFA) degree to incorporate animation. He made the remarks at the official opening of the solo exhibition by CUT’s creative art and industrial design student Ratidzo Dzomonda. “We are introducing a new component in the fine art degree (BFA), which is animation. It is tabled for rebranding to become fine art and animation, but this has not yet been ratified.
In June, all will be through at the institution, then ZIMCHE [Zimbabwe Council for Higher Education] will approve it before it is advertised for takers,” he said. “Our current animators lack that creativity. So this will help a lot of learners to improve on their creativity. We want to incorporate digital technology and tap the creativity of fine artists, whom we have seen that they are very creative. In the developed world, animation is offered as a degree on its own.” Nyamubaya said they also want to bring back creative art and design to cater for the print graphics, when they review all their programmes this year.