BULAWAYO photojournalist, Crispen Ndlovu  has embarked on a continental tour capturing historical features which could become extinct due to climate change. BY SHARON SIBINDI His photo-shoot follows a documentary about government atrocities dating back to Gukurahundi, including last year’s August 1 killings titled—The Killing Machine. In an interview with NewsDay Life &Style, Ndlovu said the motive was to preserve images for future generations in the event that features disappear from the face of Africa. “I have embarked on a photo-shoot and my aim is to encourage young people, especially Africans, to take a stand and advocate for climate change so as to preserve the planet,” he said. “Most of my works have been on politics and culture, but now I want to try a new dimension, which is climate change. Most Africans do not find climate change as a matter of urgency and some do not think it’s real.” Ndlovu said the shoot does not target Zimbabwe only, but other parts of Africa. “The shoot is being done in Zimbabwe and Kenya. I started off in Beitbridge, Nkayi, Chipinge, Chimanimani, Masvingo, Goromonzi, Lupane, Matopo, Tsholotsho, Plumtree and Munyati. Each of these places tell a story on how climate change has affected them in one way or the other,” he said.
“The approach is very radical and I feel now is the time to do it and it is time when global young people are making the loudest noise against climate change and Africa is quiet. There is deafening silence when it comes to that.” Ndlovu said the shoot was set to capture perfect natural occurrences which might be extinct if a strong position against climate change is not taken. “We might not be worst affected as it stands, but the rate at which we are being negligent, for example, carbon emission levels, use of coal and other gases being emitted into the atmosphere when we have the Environment Management Agency, but not much action is being taken by them to curb environmental crimes,” he said. “Legislation should also be put in place to combat climate change and also enforce the current legislation.” Ndlovu said he will launch an online gallery and has engaged both local and international publications about the project. “I have talked to editors of some local and international media houses to have the photos published. Since it’s all about climate change, I am sure the National Art Gallery will approve an exhibition, compared to my previous banned works and this is a self-funded project,” he said. Ndlovu has also penned a controversial book, Guveya — a political satire, which has opened a new debate about Gukurahundi.